1. THE FIRST BOOKE OF A COMMONWEALE.
2. CHAP.
3. I What the principall end is of a well ordered Commonweale.
4. ACommonweale is a lawfull gouernment of many families,and of that which vnto them in common belongeth, with a puissant soueraigntie.
5. This definition omitted by them which haue written of a Commonweale, wee haue placed
6. Cin the first place: for that in all arts and actions, it behoueth vs first to behold the end, and afterward the meanes to attaine therunto.
7. For a definition is nothing else than the very end and scope of the matter propounded, which if it be not well and surely grounded,whatsoeuer you build thereupon must together and in a moment fall.
8. And yet oftentimes it falleth out with many, that hauing propounded vnto themselues certaine ends, yet can they not attaine vnto the end by them desired; no more than the vnskilfull archer who shooteth farre and wide from the marke he aimed at, whereas he which shooteth markeman like, although he misse somewhat the marke, yet shall he shoot neerer than he, neither shall Dhe want the commendation of a good archer, hauing performed what a skilfull archer should haue done.
9. But he which knoweth not the end of the matter he hath in hand, is as farre from the hope of attaining thereunto,as he is from hitting the marke, which shooteth at randon, not knowing whereat.Wherefore let vs well examine the end, and euery part of the definition by vs before propounded.
10. And therefore in all wise and well ordered Commonweales,whether question be of the publike faith for the more safetie to bee giuen;
11. For that he which was fallen into the hands of his lawfull enemies, by the law of nations did together with his libertie loose also all such power as he had ouer his owne things.
12. Now if a man should say, that the law commaundeth to restore vnto the robber his pawne, his things committed vnto thee vpon trust, or what thou hast of him borrowed; or to repossesse him, beeing by force thrust out of a possession, neuer so vniustly by him obtained;
13. Gthere is thereof a double reason: the one, for that the robber in submitting himselfe vnto the Magistrat, and shewing his obedience vnto the lawes, in demaunding justice, deserueth to be therein regarded: the other, for that this is not so much done in fauour of the theefe or robber, as in hatred of him which would vnconscionably detaine the sacred thing left to his trust, or by way of force proceed to the gaining of that which he might by course of justice haue otherwise obtained.
14. Of the first whereof wehaue examples enow, but none more memorable than that ofAugustusthe Emperour, who caused it to be proclaimed by the sound of the Trumpet, that he would giue tenSestertieesvnto him which should bring vnto himCoracotas,the ring leader of the theeues and outlawes in Spaine:which thingCoracotasvnderstanding, of his owne
15. Haccord presented himselfe vnto the Emperour, and demaunded of him the promised reward: whichAugustuscaused to be paid vnto him, and so receiued him into his fauour, to the intent that men should not thinke, that hee would take from him his life, to deceiue him of the reward promised; or yet violate the publike faith and securitie with him, who of himselfe offered himselfe vnto the triall of justice: albeit hee might haue justly proceeded against the fellon, and so haue executed him.
16. But he that should vse such common right towards pirats & robbers, as is to be vsed against just enemies,should open a dangerous gap to all vagabonds, to ioyne themselues vnto robbers and theeues;and assure their capitall actions and confederacie, vnder the vaile of justice.Not for that it is impossible to make a good Prince of a robber, or a good King of a Irouer: yea, such a pirat there hath beene, who hath better deserued to be called a King, than many of them which haue carried the regall scepters and diadems, who haue no true or probable excuse of the robberies and cruelties which they cause their subiects to endure.
17. And not to go further for examples, in our ageSolymanthe great Sultan of the Turks, with great rewards allured vnto himHariadenus Aenobarbus, Dragut Reis,&Occhial,three of the most famous pirats of our memory;whom he made his Admirals, and great commaunders at Sea; by their strength to confirme his owne power, and to keepe vnder the other pirats, then roaming all about the seas, and so to assure his traffique.Truly by such allurements to draw arch pirats into good order, is, and shal be alwaies commendable: not onely to the end, not to make such people through dispaire to inuade the State of other princes, but also by their meanes to ruinate and bring to
18. Anaught other pirats, as enemies to mankind: who although they seeme to liue in neuer so much amitie and friendship together, and with great equalitie to diuide the spoile, (as it is reported ofBargulusandVitriatus,the arch pirats ) yet for al that they ought not to be of right called societies and amities, or partnerships; but conspiracies, robberies, & pillages: neither is that their equal parting of the spoile, to be tearmed a lawful diuision, but a meere robberie: for that the principall point wherein consisteth the true marke and cognisance of amitie in them wanteth, that is to wit, right gouernment, according to the lawes of nature.
19. Which as it may serue for a description of a Citie,so can it not stand for a true definition Bof a Commonweale, as hauing in the one part thereof too much, and in the other too little: three principall things especially to bee required in euery Commonwealth, wanting in this description, that is to say, the family, the soueraigntie, and those things which are common to a Citie, or commonweale: joyning hereunto also, that this word, Happily, as they vnderstand it, is not necessarie: for otherwise vertue should haue no prize, if the fauourable wind of prosperitie still blew not in the poope thereof, which a good man will neuer consent vnto.
20. For a Commonweale may be right well gouerned, and yet neuerthelesse afflicted with pouertie,forsaken of friends, besieged by enemies, and ouerwhelmed with many calamities:vnto which estateCicerohimselfe confesseth him to haue seene the Commonweale ofMarseilsin Prouince to haue fallen,
21. And yet neuerthelesse most certaine it is, that vertue hath not a more capitall enemie, than such a perpetual successe as they cal most happy; which to ioine together with honesty, is no lesse difficultie, than to combine things by nature most contrarie.
22. Yet is it not our intent or purpose to figure out the onely imaginary forme and Idea of a Commonweale, without effect, or substance, as hauePlato,and SirThomas MoreChauncelor of England, vainely imagined: but so neere as we possibly can precisely to follow the best lawes and rules of the most flourishing cities and Commonweals.
23. In which doing, a man is not bee iustly blamed, although hee fully attaine not vnto the end hee aimeth at, no more than the good Pilot, by force of tempest driuen out of his course; or the skilfull Physitian ouercome with the force of the maladie, are the lesse esteemed: prouided, that the one hath yet in the cure well gouerned his sicke patient; and the other in his course, his ship.
24. Now if the greatest felicitie and happinesse of one citisen, and of a whole Citie,be all one and the selfe same, and the chiefe good of both consisteth in those vertues which are proper vnto the mind, and are onely conuersant in contemplation (as they which in wisedome are said to haue farre excelled the rest, haue with great agreement affirmed ) it must needs follow also, those citisens and people to enioy true felicitie, which exercising themselues in the sweet knowledge of things naturall, humane, and diuine, referre all the fruits of their contemplation vnto the almightie God, and great Prince of nature.
25. If we then confesse this to be the principall end of the most blessed and happy life of euery one in particular, we conclude, that this is the felicitie and end also of a Commonweale.
26. But for as much as men of affaires, and Princes, are not in this point agreed, euery man measuring his good by the foot of his pleasures and contentments; and that those which haue had the same opinion of the chiefe felicitie of a man in particular, haue not alwayes agreed, That a good man and a good citisen are not all one; neither that the felicitie of one man, and of a whole Common weale are both alike: this hath made that we haue alwaies had varietie of lawes, customs, and decrees,according to the diuers humors and passions of Princes and gouernours.
27. Albeit thatAristotlesometimes followingthe vulgar opinion,seemeth doubtfull in setting downe the chiefe good thing, and not well to agree in opinion with himselfe; as thinking it necessarie vnto vertuous actions to ioyne also wealth and power: yet when he reasoneth more subtilly thereof,placing the chiefe good and felicitie of man,in Contemplation.
28. Which seemeth to haue giuen occasion vntoMarcus Varroto say, That the felicitie of man consisteth in a mixture of action and contemplation together: whereof this may seeme to haue bene the reason, For that as of one simple thing, the felicitie is simple; so of things double or compound, the felicitie is also double and compound.
29. For the goodnesse of the bodie consisteth in the health, strength, agilitie,comlinesse, and beautie thereof: but the goodnesse of the mind, that is to say,of that facultie or power which is the true bond of the bodie and vnderstanding together, consisteth in the due obedience of our desires vnto reason, that is to say, in the action of morall vertues: whereas the chiefe goodnes and felicitie of the vnderstanding and mind it selfe, consisteth in the intellectuall vertues, that is to say, Wisedom,Knowledge, and true Religion: Wisedome, concerning worldly affairs; Knowledge,concerning the searching out of the secrets of nature; and Religion, the knowledge of things diuine.
30. These are the first beginnings of a growing commonweale,viz.That those things be first prouidedfor, without which people can in no wise liue; and then after that, such other things as wherewith men liue the more commodiously and better, as medicines to cure diseases, mettals wherwith conuenient tools may be made for workmen,& armes for souldiers, not onely to repulse, but also to take reuenge vpon the enemie and robber.
31. And as we haue no care of nurturing our children, before that they by convenient education being growne, become capable both of speech and reason; no more regard haue cities also for the conforming of manners, or searching after the knowledge of naturall and diuine things, before they haue gotten such things as must needs be had to feed and defend their citisens; but are with meane wisedome content to repulse their enemies, and defend their people from iniurie.
32. But the man that hath got all things needfull for him to lead a safe and happy life withall, if he be well by nature,and better by education instructed,abhorreth the companie of loose and wicked men, sorteth himselfe with the good,and seeketh after their friendship: and afterwards when he feeleth himself cleane & free frō those perturbations and passions which trouble and molest the mind; and hath not set his whole hope vpon his vaine pelfe, hee at great ease beholdeth the chaunges and chances of the world, the vnstaidnesse and diuersitie of mens maners, their diuers ages, and conditions; some in the height of power and soueraigntie; others in the bottome of calamitie and woe:he then studiously beholdeth the mutations, risings, and downfals of Commonweals; and wisely ioyneth things forepast, vnto those that are to come.
33. After that, turning himselfe from mens affaires vnto the beautie of nature, he delighteth himselfe in beholding the varietie of natures worke in plants, liuing creatures, and minerals, hee considereth of euery one of them, their forme, their strength, and excellencie:yea he seeth the successiue transmutations of the elements themselues one into another, the singular Antipathie and contagiousnesse of things, the wonderfull order and consent of causes; whereby the things lowest, are ioyned vnto the highest, they in the middle vnto both, and so in briefe all to all: as also whereof euery thing tooke beginning, whether it returneth againe, when and how it shall take end; what in things is mortall and transitory, what immortall and eternall: and so by little and little, as it were with the swift wings of contemplation carried vp into heauen, wondreth at the brightnesse of the notable starres; the power, placing, distance, and vnequall course of the heauenly bodies; and so the good agreement and as it were most sweet harmonie of the whole world, and of euery part thereof: so rauished with a wonderfull pleasure, accompanied with a perpetuall desire to see the causes of all things, he is still caried on, vntill hee bee brought vnto God, the first cause, and gouernour of all this most faire and beautifull worke: whither when hee is once come, he staieth to search further, seeing that he is of an infinite and incomprehensible essence,greatnesse, power, wisedome, and beautie, such as cannot either by tongue be expressed, or by any mind of man conceiued: yet so much as in him is hee prayseth, extolleth, and with great deuotion honoureth, that so great brightnes of the diuine Maiestie, which by such heauenly contemplation draweth him vnto the true glorie, and chiefe end of all goodnesse.
34. For if it be true (as true it is ) that this our bodie is compact and framed of flesh and bones, to serue the soule; and our desires to obey reason: who can doubt the chiefe felicitie of man wholy to depend of the most excellent vertue thereof,which men call the action of the mind ?
35. For althoughAristotle,according to the opinion of the Stoiks, had placed the chiefe goodnes of man in the action of vertue;yet he the same man was of opinion, that the same action was still to bee referred vnto the end of contemplation: otherwise (saith hee ) the life of man should bee more blessed than that of the Gods, who not troubled with any actions or businesse, enioy the sweet fruit of eternall contemplation, with a most assured repose and rest.
36. And yet not willing to follow the doctrine of his maisterPlato,and also accounting ita shame to depart from the opinion by himselfe once receiued and set downe; for as much as he at the first had put the blessed life in action; he afterward with great ambiguitie of words, hath placed the chiefe felicitie of man, in the action of the mind, which is nothing else but contemplation: to the intent he might not seeme to haue put the chief good, both of men and commonweals, in things most contrary vnto themselues; motion (I say ) and rest, action and contemplation.
37. The moral vertues also are of much more worth and dignitie than they: for that the mind by them (or by the vertue diuine ) purged from all perturbations, and affections, may bee filled with the most sweet fruit and cleare light of contemplation.
38. Whereby it is to be vnderstood, the morall vertues to be referred vnto the intellectuall, as vnto their end.
39. Now that can in no wise be called the chiefe good or happinesse, which is referred vnto a farther thing, better and more excellent than it selfe: as the bodie vnto the soule, appetite vnto reason, motion vnto quiet rest, action vnto contemplation.
40. And therefore I suppose thatMarcus Varro,who deemed man his chiefe good to bee mixt, of action and contemplation; might (in mine opinion ) haue more aptly and better said mans life to haue need of both; yet the chiefe good and felicitie thereof to consist in contemplation: which the Academicks called the sweet,and the Hebrews the pretious death; for that it doth in a sort rauish the mind of man from out of this fraile and vile bodie, and carrieth the same vp into heauen.
41. Yet neuertheles true it is, that a commonweale cannot long stand if it be quite or long time destitute of those ordinary actions which concerne the preseruation of the peoples welfare, as the administration and execution of iustice, the prouiding of victuals, and such other things necessary for the life of man; no more than can a man long liue whose mind is so strongly rauished with the contemplation of high things, that he forgetteth to eate or drinke, and so suffereth the bodie with hunger and thirst to perish, or for lacke of rest to die.
42. But as in this fabrick of the world (which we may cal the true image of a perfect andmost absolute commonweale ) the Moone, as the soule of the world, comming neerer vnto the Sunne, seemeth to forsake this perspirall and elementarie region; and yet afterwards by the coniunction of the Sunne, filled with a diuine vertue, wonderfully imparteth the same vnto these inferiour bodies: so also the soule of this little world, by theforce of contemplation rauished out of the bodie, and in some sort as it were vnited vnto the greatSun of vnderstanding, the life of the whole world,wonderfully lightned with diuine vertue, with that celestiall force maruelously strengtheneth the bodie, with all the naturall powers thereof.
43. The same iudgement we are to haue of a well ordered commonweale; the chiefe end and felicitie wherof consisteth in the contemplatiue vertues: albeit that publick and politicall actions of lesse worth, be first and the fore-runners of the same, as the prouision of things necessarie for the maintenance and preseruation of the state and people; all which for all that we account farre inferiour vnto the morall vertues, as are also they vnto the vertues intellectuall; the end of which, is the diuine contemplation of the fairest and most excellent obiect that can possibly be thought of or imagined.
44. And thus much concerning the principall end and chiefe good of euery man in particular, as also of all men in generall, and of euery well ordered commonweale: the neerer vnto which end they approach, by so much they are the more happie.
45. For as we see in particulermen, many degrees of worldly calamitie or blisse,according to the diuers ends of good or bad that they haue vnto themselues propounded; so haue also commonweals in a sort their degrees of felicitie and miserie, some more, some lesse, according to the diuers ends they haue in their gouernment aimed at.
46. The Lacedemonians are reported to haue alwayes bene valiant and couragiousmen; but in the rest of their actions iniust and perfidious, if question once were of the common good: for that their education,their lawes, customs, and manners, had no other scope or end than to make their people couragious to vndertake all dangers, and painfull to endure all manner of labour and toyle; contemning all such pleasures and delights, as commonly effeminate the minds of men, and weaken their strength,referring
47. But the Romane commonweale hauing flourished in iustice, farre passed the Lacedemonians; for that the Romans, besides that they were passing couragious, had propounded also vnto themseluestrue iustice, whereunto, as to a marke they addressed all their actions.
48. Wherefore we must so much as in vs lyeth endeuour our selues to find the meanes to attaine or at least wise to come so neere as we possibly can, vnto that felicitie wee haue before spoken of, and to that definition of a Commonweale by vs before set downe.