1. The wrath sing, goddess, of Peleus' son, Achilles, that destructive wrath which brought countless woes upon the Achaeans, and sent forth to Hades many valiant souls of heroes, and made them themselves spoil for dogs and every bird; thus the plan of Zeus came to fulfillment, from the time when first they parted in strife Atreus' son, king of men, and brilliant Achilles.
2. Who then of the gods was it that brought these two together to contend?
3. The son of Leto and Zeus; for he in anger against the king roused throughout the host an evil pestilence, and the people began to perish, because upon the priest Chryses the son of Atreus had wrought dishonour.
4. For he had come to the swift ships of the Achaeans to free his daughter, bearing ransom past counting; and in his hands he held the wreaths of Apollo who strikes from afar, on a staff of gold; and he implored all the Achaeans, but most of all the two sons of Atreus, the marshallers of the people: Sons of Atreus, and other well - greaved Achaeans, to you may the gods who have homes upon Olympus grant that you sack the city of Priam, and return safe to your homes; but my dear child release to me, and accept the ransom out of reverence for the son of Zeus, Apollo who strikes from afar.
5. Then all the rest of the Achaeans shouted assent, to reverence the priest and accept the glorious ransom, yet the thing did not please the heart of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, but he sent him away harshly, and laid upon him a stern command:
6. Let me not find you, old man, by the hollow ships, either tarrying now or coming back later, lest your staff and the wreath of the god not protect you.
7. Her I will not set free.
8. Sooner shall old age come upon her in our house, in Argos, far from her native land, as she walks to and fro before the loom and serves my bed.
9. But go, do not anger me, that you may return the safer.
10. So he spoke, and the old man was seized with fear and obeyed his word.
11. He went forth in silence along the shore of the loud - resounding sea, and earnestly then, when he had gone apart, the old man prayed to the lord Apollo, whom fair - haired Leto bore: Hear me, god of the silver bow, who stand over Chryse and holy Cilla, and rule mightily over Tenedos, Sminthian god, if ever I roofed over a temple to your pleasing, or if ever I burned to you fat thigh - pieces of bulls and goats, fulfill this prayer for me: let the Danaans pay for my tears by your arrows
12. So he spoke in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him.
13. Down from the peaks of Olympus he strode, angered at heart, bearing on his shoulders his bow and covered quiver.
14. The arrows rattled on the shoulders of the angry god as he moved, and his coming was like the night.
15. Then he sat down apart from the ships and let fly an arrow: terrible was the twang of the silver bow.
16. The mules he assailed first and the swift dogs, but then on the men themselves he let fly his stinging shafts, and struck; and constantly the pyres of the dead burned thick.
17. For nine days the missiles of the god ranged among the host, but on the tenth Achilles called the people to assembly, for the goddess, white - armed Hera, had put it in his heart, since she pitied the Danaans, when she saw them dying.
18. When they were assembled and gathered together, among them arose and spoke swift - footed Achilles: Son of Atreus, now I think we shall return home, beaten back again, should we even escape death, if war and pestilence alike are to ravage the Achaeans.
19. But come, let us ask some seer or priest, or some reader of dreams — for a dream too is from Zeus — who might say why Phoebus Apollo is so angry, whether he finds fault with a vow or a hecatomb; in hope that he may accept the savour of lambs and unblemished goats, and be willing to ward off the pestilence from us.
20. When he had thus spoken he sat down, and among them arose Calchas son of Thestor, far the best of bird - diviners, who knew the things that were, and that were to be, and that had been before, and who had guided the ships of the Achaeans to Ilios by his own prophetic powers which Phoebus Apollo had bestowed upon him.
21. He with good intent addressed the gathering, and spoke among them: Achilles, dear to Zeus, you bid me declare the wrath of Apollo, the lord who strikes from afar.
22. Therefore I will speak; but take thought and swear that you will readily defend me with word and with might of hand; for I think I shall anger a man who rules mightily over all the Argives, and whom the Achaeans obey.
23. For mightier is a king, when he is angry at a lesser man.
24. Even if he swallows down his wrath for that day, yet afterwards he cherishes resentment in his heart till he brings it to fulfillment.
25. Say then, if you will keep me safe.
26. In answer to him spoke swift - footed Achilles:
27. Take heart, and speak out whatever oracle you know; for by Apollo, dear to Zeus, to whom you, Calchas, pray when you reveal oracles to the Danaans, no one, while I live and have sight on the earth, shall lay heavy hands on you beside the hollow ships, no one of the whole host of the Danaans, not even if you name Agamemnon, who now claims to be far the best of the Achaeans.
28. Then the blameless seer took heart, and spoke:
29. It is not then because of a vow that he finds fault, nor because of a hecatomb, but because of the priest whom Agamemnon dishonoured, and did not release his daughter nor accept the ransom.
30. For this cause the god who strikes from afar has given woes and will still give them.
31. He will not drive off from the Danaans the loathsome pestilence, until we give back to her dear father the bright - eyed maiden, unbought, unransomed, and lead a sacred hecatomb to Chryse.
32. Then we might appease and persuade him.
33. When he had thus spoken he sat down, and among them arose the warrior, son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon, deeply troubled.
34. With rage his black heart was wholly filled, and his eyes were like blazing fire.
35. To Calchas first of all he spoke, and his look threatened evil:
36. Prophet of evil, never yet have you spoken to me a pleasant thing; ever is evil dear to your heart to prophesy, but a word of good you have never yet spoken, nor brought to pass.
37. And now among the Danaans you claim in prophecy that for this reason the god who strikes from afar brings woes upon them, that I would not accept the glorious ransom for the girl, the daughter of Chryses, since I much prefer to keep her in my home.
38. For certainly I prefer her to Clytemnestra, my wedded wife, since she is not inferior to her, either in form or in stature, or in mind, or in any handiwork.
39. Yet even so will I give her back, if that is better; I would rather the people be safe than perish.
40. But provide me with a prize of honour forthwith, lest I alone of the Argives be without one, since that would not be proper.
41. For you all see this, that my prize goes elsewhere.
42. In answer to him spoke swift - footed brilliant Achilles:
43. Most glorious son of Atreus, most covetous of all, how shall the great-hearted Achaeans give you a prize?
44. We know nothing of a hoard of wealth in common store, but whatever we took by pillage from the cities has been apportioned, and it is not seemly to gather these things back from the army.
45. But give back the girl to the god, and we Achaeans will recompense you three and fourfold, if ever Zeus grants us to sack the well - walled city of Troy.
46. In answer to him spoke lord Agamemnon:
47. Do not thus, mighty though you are, godlike Achilles, seek to deceive me with your wit; for you will not get by me nor persuade me.
48. Are you willing, so that your yourself may keep your prize, for me to sit here idly in want, while you order me to give her back?
49. No, if the great-hearted Achaeans give me a prize, suiting it to my mind, so that it will be worth just as much — but if they do not, I myself will come and take your prize, or that of Aias, or that of Odysseus I will seize and bear away.
50. Angry will he be, to whomever I come.
51. But these things we will consider hereafter.
52. Let us now drag a black ship to the shining sea, and quickly gather suitable rowers into it, and place on board a hecatomb, and embark on it the fair - cheeked daughter of Chryses herself.
53. Let one prudent man be its commander, either Aias, or Idomeneus, or brilliant Odysseus, or you, son of Peleus, of all men most extreme, so that on our behalf you may propitiate the god who strikes from afar by offering sacrifice.
54. Glaring from beneath his brows spoke to him swift - footed Achilles:
55. Ah me, clothed in shamelessness, thinking of profit, how shall any man of the Achaeans obey your words with a ready heart either to go on a journey or to fight against men with force?
56. It was not on account of the Trojan spearmen that I came here to fight, since they have done no wrong to me.
57. Never have they driven off my cattle or my horses, nor ever in deep-soiled Phthia, nurse of men, did they lay waste the harvest, for many things lie between us — shadowy mountains and sounding sea.
58. But you, shameless one, we followed, so that you might rejoice, seeking to win recompense for Menelaus and for yourself, dog- face, from the Trojans.
59. This you disregard, and take no heed of.
60. And now you threaten that you will yourself take my prize away from me, for which I toiled so much, which the sons of the Achaeans gave to me.
61. Never have I prize like yours, whenever the Achaeans sack a well - inhabited citadel of the Trojans.
62. The brunt of furious battle do my hands undertake, but if ever an apportionment comes, your prize is far greater, while small but dear is the reward I take to my ships, when I have worn myself out in the fighting.
63. Now I will go back to Phthia, since it is far better to return home with my beaked ships, nor do I intend while I am here dishonoured to pile up riches and wealth for you.
64. Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him:
65. Flee then, if your heart urges you; I do not beg you to remain for my sake.
66. With me are others who will honour me, and above all Zeus, the lord of counsel.
67. Most hateful to me are you of all the kings that Zeus nurtures, for always strife is dear to you, and wars and battles.
68. If you are very strong, it was a god, I think, who gave you this gift.
69. Go home with your ships and your companions and lord it over the Myrmidons; for you I care not, nor take heed of your wrath.
70. But I will threaten you thus: as Phoebus Apollo takes from me the daughter of Chryses, her with my ship and my companions I will send back, but I will myself come to your tent and take the fair - cheeked Briseis, your prize, so that you will understand how much mightier I am than you, and another may shrink from declaring himself my equal and likening himself to me to my face.
71. So he spoke.
72. Grief came upon the son of Peleus, and within his shaggy breast his heart was divided, whether he should draw his sharp sword from beside his thigh, and break up the assembly, and slay the son of Atreus, or stay his anger and curb his spirit.
73. While he pondered this in mind and heart, and was drawing from its sheath his great sword, Athene came from heaven.
74. The white - armed goddess Hera had sent her forth, for in her heart she loved and cared for both men alike.
75. She stood behind him, and seized the son of Peleus by his fair hair, appearing to him alone.
76. No one of the others saw her.
77. Achilles was seized with wonder, and turned around, and immediately recognized Pallas Athene.
78. Terribly her eyes shone.
79. Then he addressed her with winged words, and said:
80. Why now, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, have you come?
81. Is it so that you might see the arrogance of Agamemnon, son of Atreus?
82. One thing I will tell you, and I think this will be brought to pass: through his own excessive pride shall he presently lose his life.
83. Him then the goddess, bright - eyed Athene, answered: I have come from heaven to stay your anger, if you will obey, The goddess white - armed Hera sent me forth, for in her heart she loves and cares for both of you.
84. But come, cease from strife, and do not grasp the sword with your hand.
85. With words indeed taunt him, telling him how it shall be.
86. For thus will I speak, and this thing shall truly be brought to pass.
87. Hereafter three times as many glorious gifts shall be yours on account of this arrogance.
88. But refrain, and obey us.
89. In answer to her spoke swift - footed Achilles:
90. It is necessary, goddess, to observe the words of you two, however angered a man be in his heart, for is it better so.
91. Whoever obeys the gods, to him do they gladly give ear.
92. He spoke, and stayed his heavy hand on the silver hilt, and back into its sheath thrust the great sword, and did not disobey the word of Athene.
93. She returned to Olympus to the palace of aegis-bearing Zeus, to join the company of the other gods.
94. But the son of Peleus again addressed with violent words the son of Atreus, and in no way ceased from his wrath:
95. Heavy with wine, with the face of a dog but the heart of a deer, never have you had courage to arm for battle along with your people, or go forth to an ambush with the chiefs of the Achaeans.
96. That seems to you even as death.
97. Indeed it is far better throughout the wide camp of the Achaeans to deprive of his prize whoever speaks contrary to you.
98. People-devouring king, since you rule over nobodies; else, son of Atreus, this would be your last piece of insolence.
99. But I will speak out to you, and will swear thereto a mighty oath: by this staff, that shall never more put forth leaves or shoots since first it left its stump among the mountains, nor shall it again grow green, for the bronze has stripped it on all sides of leaves and bark, and now the sons of the Achaeans carry it in their hands when they act as judges, those who guard the ordinances that come from Zeus; and this shall be for you a mighty oath.
100. Surely some day a longing for Achilles will come upon the sons of the Achaeans one and all, and on that day you will not be able to help them at all, for all your grief, when many shall fall dying before man-slaying Hector.
101. But you will gnaw the heart within you, in anger that you did no honour to the best of the Achaeans.
102. So spoke the son of Peleus, and down to the earth he dashed the staff studded with golden nails, and himself sat down, while over against him the son of Atreus continued to vent his wrath.
103. Then among them arose Nestor, sweet of speech, the clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, from whose tongue flowed speech sweeter than honey.
104. Two generations of mortal men had passed away in his lifetime, who had been born and reared with him before in sacred Pylos, and he was king among the third.
105. He with good intent addressed the gathering and spoke among them: Comrades, great grief has come upon the land of Achaea.
106. Truly would Priam and the sons of Priam rejoice, and the rest of the Trojans would be most glad at heart, were they to hear all this of you two quarrelling, you who are chief among the Danaans in counsel and chief in war.
107. Listen to me, for you are both younger than I.
108. In earlier times I moved among men more warlike than you, and never did they despise me.
109. Such warriors have I never since seen, nor shall I see, as Peirithous was and Dryas, shepherd of the people, and Caeneus and Exadius and godlike Polyphemus, and Theseus, son of Aegeus, a man like the immortals.
110. Mightiest were these of men reared upon the earth; mightiest were they, and with the mightiest they fought, the mountain- dwelling centaurs, and they destroyed them terribly.
111. With these men I had fellowship, when I came from Pylos, from a distant land far away; for they themselves called me.
112. And I fought on my own; with those men could no one fight of the mortals now upon the earth.
113. Yes, and they listened to my counsel, and obeyed my words.
114. So also should you obey, since to obey is better.
115. Neither do you, mighty though you are, take away the girl, but let her be, as the sons of the Achaeans first gave her to him as a prize; nor do you, son of Peleus, be minded to strive with a king, might against might, for it is no common honour that is the portion of a sceptre-holding king, to whom Zeus gives glory.
116. If you are a stronger fighter, and a goddess mother bore you, yet he is the mightier, since he is king over more.
117. Son of Atreus, check your rage.
118. Indeed, I beg you to let go your anger against Achilles, who is for all the Achaeans a mighty bulwark in evil war.
119. In answer to him spoke lord Agamemnon:
120. All these things, old man, to be sure, you have spoken as is right.
121. But this man wishes to be above all others; over all he wishes to rule and over all to be king, and to all to give orders; in this, I think, there is someone who will not obey.
122. If the gods who exist for ever made him a spearman, do they therefore license him to keep uttering insults?
123. Brilliant Achilles broke in upon him and replied: Surely I would be called cowardly and of no account, if I am to yield to you in every matter that you say.
124. On others lay these commands, but do not give orders to me, for I do not think I shall obey you any longer.
125. And another thing I will tell you, and take it to heart: with my hands I will not fight for the girl's sake either with you nor with any other, since you are taking away what you have given.
126. But of all else that is mine by my swift black ship, nothing will you take or carry away against my will.
127. Come, just try, so that these too may know: forthwith will your dark blood flow forth about my spear.
128. So when the two had made an end of contending with violent words, they rose, and broke up the gathering beside the ships of the Achaeans.
129. The son of Peleus went his way to his huts and his balanced ships together with the son of Menoetius, and with his men; but the son of Atreus launched a swift ship on the sea, and chose for it twenty rowers, and drove on board a hecatomb for the god, and brought the fair - cheeked daughter of Chryses and set her in the ship; and Odysseus of many wiles went on board to take command.
130. So these embarked and sailed over the watery ways; but the son of Atreus bade the people purify themselves.
131. And they purified themselves, and cast the defilement into the sea, and offered to Apollo perfect hecatombs of bulls and goats by the shore of the barren sea; and the savour thereof went up to heaven, eddying amid the smoke.
132. Thus were they busied throughout the camp; but Agamemnon did not cease from the strife with which he had first threatened Achilles, but called to Talthybius and Eurybates, who were his heralds and ready squires:
133. Go to the hut of Achilles, Peleus' son, and take by the hand the fair - cheeked Briseis, and lead her hither; and if he give her not, I will myself go with a larger company and take her; that will be even the worse for him.
134. So saying he sent them forth, and laid upon them a stern command.
135. Unwilling went the two along the shore of the barren sea, and came to the tents and the ships of the Myrmidons.
136. Him they found sitting beside his tent and his black ship; and Achilles was not glad at sight of them.
137. The two, seized with dread and in awe of the king, stood, and spoke no word to him, nor made question; but he knew in his heart, and spoke: Hail, heralds, messengers of Zeus and men, draw near.
138. It is not you who are guilty in my sight, but Agamemnon, who sent you forth for the sake of the girl, Briseis.
139. But come, Patroclus, sprung from Zeus, bring forth the girl, and give her to them to lead away.
140. However, let these two themselves be witnesses before the blessed gods and mortal men, and before him, that ruthless king, if hereafter there shall be need of me to ward off shameful ruin from the host.
141. Truly he rages with baneful mind, and knows not at all to look both before and after, that his Achaeans might wage war in safety beside their ships.
142. So he spoke, and Patroclus obeyed his dear comrade, and led forth from the hut the fair - cheeked Briseis, and gave her to them to lead away.
143. So the two went back beside the ships of the Achaeans, and with them, all unwilling, went the woman.
144. But Achilles burst into tears, and withdrew apart from his comrades, and sat down on the shore of the grey sea, looking forth over the wine - dark deep.
145. Earnestly he prayed to his dear mother with hands outstretched: Mother, since you bore me, though to so brief a span of life, honour surely ought the Olympian to have given into my hands, Zeus who thunders on high; but now he has honoured me not a bit.
146. Truly the son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon has dishonoured me: for he has taken and keeps my prize through his own arrogant act.
147. So he spoke, weeping, and his lady mother heard him, as she sat in the depths of the sea beside the old man, her father.
148. And speedily she came forth from the grey sea like a mist, and sat down before him, as he wept, and she stroked him with her hand, and spoke to him, and called him by name:
149. My child, why do you weep?
150. What sorrow has come upon your heart?
151. Speak out; hide it not in your mind, that we both may know.
152. Then with heavy moaning spoke swift - footed Achilles to her: You know.
153. Why then should I tell the tale to you who knows all?
154. We went forth to Thebe, the sacred city of Eetion, and laid it waste, and brought here all the spoil.
155. This the sons of the Achaeans divided properly among themselves, but for the son of Atreus they chose out the fair - cheeked daughter of Chryses.
156. However, Chryses, priest of Apollo, who strikes from afar, came to the swift ships of the bronze - clad Achaeans, to free his daughter, bearing ransom past counting, and in his hands he held the wreaths of Apollo who strikes from afar, on a staff of gold, and he implored all the Achaeans, but most of all the two sons of Atreus, marshallers of the people.
157. Then all the rest of the Achaeans shouted assent, to reverence the priest and accept the glorious ransom; yet the thing did not please the heart of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, but he sent him away harshly, and laid upon him a stern command.
158. So the old man went back again in anger; and Apollo heard his prayer, for he was very dear to him, and sent against the Argives an evil shaft.
159. Then the people began to die thick and fast, and the shafts of the god ranged everywhere throughout the wide camp of the Achaeans.
160. But to us the prophet with sure knowledge declared the oracles of the god who strikes from afar.
161. Forthwith, then, I first bade propitiate the god, but thereafter anger seized the son of Atreus, and straightway he arose and spoke a threatening word, which now has come to pass.
162. For the quick - glancing Achaeans are taking the maiden in a swift ship to Chryse, and are bearing gifts to the god; while the other woman the heralds have just now taken from my tent and led away, the daughter of Briseus, whom the sons of the Achaeans gave me.
163. But, you, if you are able, guard your own son; go to Olympus and make prayer to Zeus, if ever you have gladdened his heart by word or deed.
164. For often I have heard you glorying in the halls of my father, and declaring that you alone among the immortals warded off shameful ruin from the son of Cronos, lord of the dark clouds, on the day when the other Olympians wished to put him in bonds, even Hera and Poseidon and Pallas Athene.
165. But you came, goddess, and freed him from his bonds, when you had quickly called to high Olympus him of the hundred hands, whom the gods call Briareus, but all men Aegaeon; for he is mightier than his father.
166. He sat down by the side of the son of Cronos, exulting in his glory, and the blessed gods were seized with fear of him, and did not bind Zeus.
167. Bring this now to his remembrance, and sit by his side, and clasp his knees, in hope that he might perhaps wish to succour the Trojans, and for those others, the Achaeans, to pen them in among the sterns of their ships and around the sea as they are slain, so that they may all have profit of their king, and that the son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon may know his blindness in that he did no honour to the best of the Achaeans.
168. Then Thetis answered him as she wept:
169. Ah me, my child, why did I rear you, cursed in my child - bearing?
170. Would that it had been your lot to remain by your ships without tears and without grief, since your span of life is brief and endures no long time; but now you are doomed to a speedy death and are laden with sorrow above all men; therefore to an evil fate I bore you in our halls.
171. Yet in order to tell this your word to Zeus who delights in the thunderbolt I will myself go to snowy Olympus, in hope that he may be persuaded.
172. But remain by your swift, sea-faring ships, and continue your wrath against the Achaeans, and refrain utterly from battle; for Zeus went yesterday to Oceanus, to the blameless Ethiopians for a feast, and all the gods followed with him; but on the twelfth day he will come back again to Olympus, and then will I go to the house of Zeus with threshold of bronze, and will clasp his knees in prayer, and I think I shall win him.
173. So saying, she went her way and left him where he was, angry at heart for the fair - girdled woman's sake, whom they had taken from him by force though he was unwilling; and meanwhile Odysseus came to Chryse bringing the holy hecatomb.
174. When they had arrived within the deep harbour, they furled the sail, and stowed it in the black ship, and the mast they lowered by the forestays and brought it to the crutch with speed, and rowed her with oars to the place of anchorage.
175. Then they cast out the mooring - stones and made fast the stern cables, and themselves went forth upon the shore of the sea.
176. They brought forth the hecatomb for Apollo, who strikes from afar, and forth stepped also the daughter of Chryses from the sea-faring ship.
177. Her then did Odysseus of many wiles lead to the altar, and place in the arms of her dear father, saying to him: Chryses, Agamemnon, king of men, sent me forth to bring to you your daughter, and to offer to Phoebus a holy hecatomb on the Danaans' behalf, that therewith we may propitiate the lord, who has now brought upon the Argives woeful lamentation.
178. So saying he placed her in his arms, and he joyfully took his dear child; but they made haste to set in array for the god the holy hecatomb around the well - built altar, and then they washed their hands and took up the barley grains.
179. Then Chryses lifted up his hands, and prayed aloud for them: Hear me, god of the silver bow, who stands over Chryse and holy Cilla, and rules mightily over Tenedos.
180. As before you heard me when I prayed — to me you did honour, and mightily smote the host of the Achaeans — even so now fulfill me this my desire: ward off now from the Danaans the loathly pestilence.
181. So he spoke in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him.
182. Then, when they had prayed, and had sprinkled the barley grains, they first drew back the victims' heads, and cut their throats, and flayed them, and cut out the thighs and covered them with a double layer of fat, and laid raw flesh thereon.
183. And the old man burned them on stakes of wood, and made libation over them of gleaming wine; and beside him the young men held in their hands the five - pronged forks.
184. But when the thigh - pieces were wholly burned, and they had tasted the entrails, they cut up the rest and spitted it, and roasted it carefully, and drew all off the spits.
185. Then, when they had ceased from their labour and had made ready the meal, they feasted, nor did their hearts lack anything of the equal feast.
186. But when they had put from them the desire for food and drink, the youths filled the bowls brim full of drink and served out to all, first pouring drops for libation into the cups.
187. So the whole day long they sought to appease the god with song, singing the beautiful paean, the sons of the Achaeans, hymning the god who works from afar; and his heart was glad, as he heard.
188. But when the sun set and darkness came on, they lay down to rest by the stern cables of the ship, and as soon as early rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, then they set sail for the wide camp of the Achaeans.
189. And Apollo, who works from afar, sent them a favouring wind, and they set up the mast and spread the white sail.
190. So the wind filled the belly of the sail, and the dark wave sang loudly about the stem of the ship, as she went, and she sped over the wave, accomplishing her way.
191. But when they came to the wide camp of the Achaeans, they drew the black ship up on the shore, high upon the sands, and set in line the long props beneath, and themselves scattered among the tents and ships.
192. But he in his wrath sat beside his swift - faring ships, the Zeus-sprung son of Peleus, swift - footed Achilles.
193. Never did he go forth to the place of gathering, where men win glory, nor ever to war, but wasted away his own heart, as he tarried where he was; and he longed for the war-cry and the battle.
194. Now when the twelfth morning thereafter had come, then into Olympus came the gods who are for ever, all in one company, and Zeus led the way.
195. And Thetis did not forget the behest of her son, but rose up from the wave of the sea, and at early morning went up to great heaven and Olympus.
196. There she found the far-seeing son of Cronos sitting apart from the rest upon the topmost peak of many - ridged Olympus.
197. So she sat down before him, and clasped his knees with her left hand, while with her right she touched him beneath the chin, and she spoke in prayer to king Zeus, son of Cronos: Father Zeus, if ever amid the immortals I gave you aid by word or deed, grant me this prayer: do honour to my son, who is doomed to a speedy death beyond all other men; yet now Agamemnon, king of men, has dishonoured him, for he has taken and keeps his prize by his own arrogant act.
198. But honour him, Olympian Zeus, lord of counsel; and give might to the Trojans, until the Achaeans do honour to my son, and magnify him with recompense.
199. So she spoke; but Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, spoke no word to her, but sat a long time in silence.
200. Yet Thetis, even as she had clasped his knees, so held to him, clinging close, and questioned him again a second time:
201. Give me your infallible promise, and bow your head to it, or else deny me, for there is nothing to make you afraid; so that I may know well how far I among all the gods am honoured the least.
202. Then, greatly troubled, Zeus, the cloud - gatherer spoke to her: Surely this will be sorry work, since you will set me on to engage in strife with Hera, when she shall anger me with taunting words.
203. Even now she always upbraids me among the immortal gods, and declares that I give aid to the Trojans in battle.
204. But for the present, depart again, lest Hera note something; and I will take thought for these things to bring all to pass.
205. Come, I will bow my head to you, that thou may be certain, for this from me is the surest token among the immortals; no word of mine may be recalled, nor is false, nor unfulfilled, to which I bow my head.
206. The son of Cronos spoke, and bowed his dark brow in assent, and the ambrosial locks waved from the king's immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake.
207. When the two had taken counsel together in this way, they parted; she leapt straightway into the deep sea from gleaming Olympus, and Zeus went to his own palace.
208. All the gods together rose from their seats before the face of their father; no one dared to await his coming, but they all rose up before him.
209. So he sat down there upon his throne; but Hera saw, and failed not to note how silver - footed Thetis, daughter of the old man of the sea, had taken counsel with him.
210. Forthwith then she spoke to Zeus, son of Cronos, with mocking words:
211. Who of the gods, crafty one, has now again taken counsel with you?
212. Always is it your pleasure to hold aloof from me, and to give judgments which you have pondered in secret, nor have you ever brought yourself with a ready heart to declare to me the matter which you devise.
213. In answer to her spoke the father of men and gods:
214. Hera, do not hope to know all my words: hard will they prove for you, though you are my wife.
215. Whatever it is fitting for you to hear, this none other shall know before you, whether of gods or men; but what I wish to devise apart from the gods, of all this do not in any way inquire nor ask.
216. In answer to him spoke the ox-eyed lady Hera:
217. Most dread son of Cronos, what a word you have said !
218. Truly, in the past I have not been accustomed to inquire nor ask you, but at your ease you devise all things whatever you wish.
219. But now I have wondrous dread at heart, lest silver - footed Thetis, daughter of the old man of the sea, have beguiled you; for at early dawn she sat by you and clasped your knees.
220. To her, I think, you bowed your head in sure token that you will honour Achilles, and bring many to death beside the ships of the Achaeans.
221. Then in answer to her spoke Zeus, the cloud - gatherer:
222. Strange one, you are always suspecting, and I do not escape you; yet you shall be able to accomplish nothing, but shall be even further from my heart; and that shall be the worse for you.
223. If this thing is as you say, then it must be pleasing to me.
224. Sit down in silence, and obey my word, lest all the gods that are in Olympus avail you not against my drawing near, when I put forth upon you my irresistible hands.
225. He spoke, and ox -eyed lady Hera was seized with fear, and sat down in silence, curbing her heart.
226. Then troubled were the gods of heaven throughout the palace of Zeus, and among them Hephaestus, the famed craftsman, was first to speak, doing pleasure to his dear mother, white - armed Hera:
227. Surely this will be sorry work, that is no longer bearable, if you two are to wrangle thus for mortals' sakes, and set the gods in tumult; neither will there be any joy in the excellent feast, since worse things prevail.
228. And I give counsel to my mother, wise though she be herself, to do pleasure to our dear father Zeus, that the father upbraid her not again, and bring confusion upon our feast.
229. What if the Olympian, the lord of the lightning, were minded to dash us from our seats !
230. for he is mightiest far.
231. But address him with gentle words; so shall the Olympian forthwith be gracious to us.
232. So saying, he sprang up and placed in his dear mother's hand the double cup, and spoke to her:
233. Be patient, my mother, and endure for all your grief, lest, dear as you are to me, my eyes see you stricken, and then I shall in no way be able to succour you for all my sorrow; for a hard foe is the Olympian to meet in strife.
234. On a time before this, when I was striving to save you, he caught me by the foot and hurled me from the heavenly threshold; the whole day long I was carried headlong, and at sunset I fell in Lemnos, and but little life was in me.
235. There the Sintian folk quickly tended me for my fall.
236. So he spoke, and the goddess, white - armed Hera, smiled, and smiling took in her hand the cup from her son.
237. Then he poured wine for all the other gods from left to right, drawing forth sweet nectar from the bowl.
238. And unquenchable laughter arose among the blessed gods, as they saw Hephaestus puffing through the palace.
239. Thus the whole day long till the setting of the sun they feasted, nor did their heart lack anything of the equal feast, nor of the beauteous lyre, that Apollo held, nor yet of the Muses, who sang, replying one to the other with sweet voices.
240. But when the bright light of the sun was set, they went each to his own house to take their rest, where for each one a palace had been built with cunning skill by the famed Hephaestus, the limping god; and Zeus, the Olympian, lord of the lightning, went to his couch, where of old he took his rest, whenever sweet sleep came upon him.
241. There went he up and slept, and beside him lay Hera of the golden throne.
242. Now all the other gods and men, lords of chariots, slumbered the whole night through, but Zeus was not holden of sweet sleep, for he was pondering in his heart how he might do honour to Achilles and lay many low beside the ships of the Achaeans.
243. And this plan seemed to his mind the best, to send to Agamemnon, son of Atreus, a baneful dream.
244. So he spake, and addressed him with winged words:
245. Up, go, thou baneful Dream, unto the swift ships of the Achaeans, and when thou art come to the hut of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, tell him all my word truly, even as I charge thee.
246. Bid him arm the long - haired Achaeans with all speed, since now he may take the broad - wayed city of the Trojans.
247. For the immortals, that have homes upon Olympus, are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath Vent the minds of all by her supplication, and over the Trojans hang woes.
248. So spake he, and the Dream went his way, when he had heard this saying.
249. Forthwith he came to the swift ships of the Achaeans, and went his way to Agamemnon, son of Atreus, and found him sleeping in his hut, and over him was shed ambrosial slumber.
250. So he took his stand above his head, in the likeness of the son of Neleus, even Nestor, whom above all the elders Agamemnon held in honour; likening himself to him, the Dream from heaven spake, saying:
251. Thou sleepest, son of wise - hearted Atreus, the tamer of horses.
252. To sleep the whole night through beseemeth not a man that is a counsellor, to whom a host is entrusted, and upon whom rest so many cares.
253. But now, hearken thou quickly unto me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who, far away though he be, hath exceeding care for thee and pity.
254. He biddeth thee arm the long - haired Achaeans with all speed, since now thou mayest take the broad - wayed city of the Trojans.
255. For the immortals that have homes upon Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath bent the minds of all by her supplication, and over the Trojans hang woes by the will of Zeus.
256. But do thou keep this in thy heart, nor let forgetfulness lay hold of thee, whenso honey - hearted sleep shall let thee go.
257. So spoke the Dream, and departed, and left him there, pondering in his heart on things that were not to be brought to pass.
258. For in sooth he deemed that he should take the city of Priam that very day, fool that he was !
259. seeing he knew not what deeds Zeus was purposing, who was yet to bring woes and groanings on Trojans alike and Danaans throughout the course of stubborn fights.
260. Then he awoke from sleep, and the divine voice was ringing in his ears.
261. He sat upright and did on his soft tunic, fair and glistering, and about him cast his great cloak, and beneath his shining feet he bound his fair sandals, and about his shoulders flung his silver - studded sword; and he grasped the sceptre of his fathers, imperishable ever, and therewith took his way along the ships of the brazen - coated Achaeans.
262. Now the goddess Dawn went up to high Olympus, to announce the light to Zeus and the other immortals, but Agamemnon bade the clear-voiced heralds summon to the place of gathering the long - haired Achaeans.
263. And they made summons, and the men gathered full quickly.
264. But the king first made the council of the great- souled elders to sit down beside the ship of Nestor, the king Pylos -born.
265. And when he had called them together, he contrived a cunning plan, and said: Hearken, my friends, a Dream from heaven came to me in my sleep through the ambrosial night, and most like was it to goodly Nestor, in form and in stature and in build.
266. It took its stand above my head, and spake to me, saying: ‘ Thou sleepest, son of wise - hearted Atreus, the tamer of horses.
267. To sleep the whole night through beseemeth not a man that is a counsellor, to whom a host is entrusted, and upon whom rest so many cares.
268. But now, hearken thou quickly unto me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who, far away though he be, hath exceeding care for thee and pity.
269. He biddeth thee arm the long - haired Achaeans with all speed, since now thou mayest take the broad - wayed city of the Trojans.
270. For the immortals that have homes upon Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath bent the minds of all by her supplication, and over the Trojans hang woes by the will of Zeus.
271. But do thou keep this in thy heart.’
272. So spake he, and was flown away, and sweet sleep let me go.
273. Nay, come now, if in any wise we may, let us arm the sons of the Achaeans; but first will I make trial of them in speech, as is right, and will bid them flee with their benched ships; but do you from this side and from that bespeak them, and strive to hold them back.
274. So saying, he sate him down, and among them uprose Nestor, that was king of sandy Pylos.
275. He with good intent addressed their gathering and spake among them:
276. My friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, were it any other of the Achaeans that told us this dream we might deem it a false thing, and turn away therefrom the more; but now hath he seen it who declares himself to be far the mightiest of the Achaeans.
277. Nay, come then, if in any wise we may arm the sons of the Achaeans.
278. He spake, and led the way forth from the council, and the other sceptred kings rose up thereat and obeyed the shepherd of the host; and the people the while were hastening on.
279. Even as the tribes of thronging bees go forth from some hollow rock, ever coming on afresh, and in clusters over the flowers of spring fly in throngs, some here, some there; even so from the ships and huts before the low sea-beach marched forth in companies their many tribes to the place of gathering.
280. And in their midst blazed forth Rumour, messenger of Zeus, urging them to go; and they were gathered.
281. And the place of gathering was in a turmoil, and the earth groaned beneath them, as the people sate them down, and a din arose.
282. Nine heralds with shouting sought to restrain them, if so be they might refrain from uproar and give ear to the kings, nurtured of Zeus.
283. Hardly at the last were the people made to sit, and were stayed in their places, ceasing from their clamour.
284. Then among them lord Agamemnon uprose, bearing in his hands the sceptre which Hephaestus had wrought with toil.
285. Hephaestus gave it to king Zeus, son of Cronos, and Zeus gave it to the messenger Argeïphontes; and Hermes, the lord, gave it to Pelops, driver of horses, and Pelops in turn gave it to Atreus, shepherd of the host; and Atreus at his death left it to Thyestes, rich in flocks, and Thyestes again left it to Agamemnon to bear, that so he might be lord of many isles and of all Argos.
286. Thereon he leaned, and spake his word among the Argives:
287. My friends, Danaan warriors, squires of Ares, great Zeus, son of Cronos, hath ensnared me in grievous blindness of heart, cruel god !
288. seeing that of old he promised me, and bowed his head thereto, that not until I had sacked well - walled Ilios should I get me home; but now hath he planned cruel deceit, and bids me return inglorious to Argos, when I have lost much people.
289. So, I ween, must be the good pleasure of Zeus, supreme in might, who hath laid low the heads of many cities, yea, and shall yet lay low, for his power is above all.
290. A shameful thing is this even for the hearing of men that are yet to be, how that thus vainly so goodly and so great a host of the Achaeans warred a bootless war, and fought with men fewer than they, and no end thereof hath as yet been seen.
291. For should we be minded, both Achaeans and Trojans, to swear a solemn oath with sacrifice, and to number ourselves, and should the Trojans be gathered together, even all they that have dwellings in the city, and we Achaeans be marshalled by tens, and choose, each company of us, a man of the Trojans to pour our wine, then would many tens lack a cup -bearer; so far, I deem, do the sons of the Achaeans outnumber the Trojans that dwell in the city.
292. But allies there be out of many cities, men that wield the spear, who hinder me mightily, and for all that I am fain, suffer me not to sack the well - peopled citadel of Ilios.
293. Already have nine years of great Zeus gone by, and lo, our ships' timbers are rotted, and the tackling loosed; and our wives, I ween, and little children sit in our halls awaiting us; yet is our task wholly unaccomplished in furtherance whereof we came hither.
294. Nay, come, even as I shall bid, let us all obey: let us flee with our ships to our dear native land; for no more is there hope that we shall take broad - wayed Troy.
295. So spake he, and roused the hearts in the breasts of all throughout the multitude, as many as had not heard the council.
296. And the gathering was stirred like the long sea-waves of the Icarian main, which the East Wind or the South Wind has raised, rushing upon them from the clouds of father Zeus.
297. And even as when the West Wind at its coming stirreth a deep cornfield with its violent blast, and the ears bow thereunder, even so was all their gathering stirred, and they with loud shouting rushed towards the ships; and from beneath their feet the dust arose on high.
298. And they called each one to his fellow to lay hold of the ships and draw them into the bright sea, and they set themselves to clear the launching - ways, and their shouting went up to heaven, so fain were they of their return home; and they began to take the props from beneath the ships.
299. Then would the Argives have accomplished their return even beyond what was ordained, had not Hera spoken a word to Athena, saying:
300. Out upon it, child of Zeus that beareth the aegis, unwearied one !
301. Is it thus indeed that the Argives are to flee to their dear native land over the broad back of the sea?
302. Aye, and they would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Argive Helen, for whose sake many an Achaean hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land.
303. But go thou now throughout the host of the brazen - coated Achaeans; with thy gentle words seek thou to restrain every man, neither suffer them to draw into the sea their curved ships.
304. So spake she, and the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, failed not to hearken.
305. Down from the peaks of Olympus she went darting, and speedily came to the swift ships of the Achaeans.
306. There she found Odysseus, the peer of Zeus in counsel, as he stood.
307. He laid no hand upon his benched, black ship, for that grief had come upon his heart and soul; and flashing - eyed Athene stood near him, and said: Son of Laërtes, sprung from Zeus, Odysseus of many wiles, is it thus indeed that ye will fling yourselves on your benched ships to flee to your dear native land?
308. Aye, and ye would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Argive Helen, for whose sake many an Achaean hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land.
309. But go thou now throughout the host of the Achaeans, and hold thee back no more; and with thy gentle words seek thou to restrain every man, neither suffer them to draw into the sea their curved ships.
310. So said she, and he knew the voice of the goddess as she spake, and set him to run, and cast from him his cloak, which his herald gathered up, even Eurybates of Ithaca, that waited on him.
311. But himself he went straight to Agamemnon, son of Atreus, and received at his hand the staff of his fathers, imperishable ever, and therewith went his way along the ships of the brazen - coated Achaeans.
312. Whomsoever he met that was a chieftain or man of note, to his side would he come and with gentle words seek to restrain him, saying: Good Sir, it beseems not to seek to affright thee as if thou were a coward, but do thou thyself sit thee down, and make the rest of thy people to sit.
313. For thou knowest not yet clearly what is the mind of the son of Atreus; now he does but make trial, whereas soon he will smite the sons of the Achaeans.
314. Did we not all hear what he spake in the council?
315. Beware lest waxing wroth he work mischief to the sons of the Achaeans.
316. Proud is the heart of kings, fostered of heaven; for their honour is from Zeus, and Zeus, god of counsel, loveth them.
317. But whatsoever man of the people he saw, and found brawling, him would he smite with his staff; and chide with words, saying, Fellow, sit thou still, and hearken to the words of others that are better men than thou; whereas thou art unwarlike and a weakling, neither to be counted in war nor in counsel.
318. In no wise shall we Achaeans all be kings here.
319. No good thing is a multitude of lords; let there be one lord, one king, to whom the son of crooked - counselling Cronos hath vouchsafed the sceptre and judgments, that he may take counsel for his people.
320. Thus masterfully did he range through the host, and they hasted back to the place of gathering from their ships and huts with noise, as when a wave of the loud - resounding sea thundereth on the long beach, and the deep roareth.
321. Now the others sate them down and were stayed in their places, only there still kept chattering on Thersites of measureless speech, whose mind was full of great store of disorderly words, wherewith to utter revilings against the kings, idly, and in no orderly wise, but whatsoever he deemed would raise a laugh among the Argives.
322. Evil - favoured was he beyond all men that came to Ilios: he was bandy - legged and lame in the one foot, and his two shoulders were rounded, stooping together over his chest, and above them his head was warped, and a scant stubble grew thereon.
323. Hateful was he to Achilles above all, and to Odysseus, for it was they twain that he was wont to revile; but now again with shrill cries he uttered abuse against goodly Agamemnon.
324. With him were the Achaeans exceeding wroth, and had indignation in their hearts.
325. Howbeit with loud shoutings he spake and chid Agamemnon: Son of Atreus, with what art thou now again discontent, or what lack is thine?
326. Filled are thy huts with bronze, and women full many are in thy huts, chosen spoils that we Achaeans give thee first of all, whensoe'er we take a citadel.
327. Or dost thou still want gold also, which some man of the horse - taming Trojans shall bring thee out of Ilios as a ransom for his son, whom I haply have bound and led away or some other of the Achaeans?
328. Or is it some young girl for thee to know in love, whom thou wilt keep apart for thyself?
329. Nay, it beseemeth not one that is their captain to bring to ill the sons of the Achaeans.
330. Soft fools !
331. base things of shame, ye women of Achaea, men no more, homeward let us go with our ships, and leave this fellow here in the land of Troy to digest his prizes, that so he may learn whether in us too there is aught of aid for him or no — for him that hath now done dishonour to Achilles, a man better far than he; for he hath taken away, and keepeth his prize by his own arrogant act.
332. Of a surety there is naught of wrath in the heart of Achilles; nay, he heedeth not at all; else, son of Atreus, wouldest thou now work insolence for the last time.
333. So spake Thersites, railing at Agamemnon, shepherd of the host.
334. But quickly to his side came goodly Odysseus, and with an angry glance from beneath his brows, chid him with harsh words, saying:
335. Thersites of reckless speech, clear -voiced talker though thou art, refrain thee, and be not minded to strive singly against kings.
336. For I deem that there is no viler mortal than thou amongst all those that with the sons of Atreus came beneath Ilios.
337. Wherefore' twere well thou shouldst not take the name of kings in thy mouth as thou protest, to cast reproaches upon them, and to watch for home-going.
338. In no wise do we know clearly as yet how these things are to be, whether it be for good or ill that we sons of the Achaeans shall return.
339. Therefore dost thou now continually utter revilings against Atreus' son, Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, for that the Danaan warriors give him gifts full many; whereas thou pratest on with railings.
340. But I will speak out to thee, and this word shall verily be brought to pass: if I find thee again playing the fool, even as now thou dost, then may the head of Odysseus abide no more upon his shoulders, nor may I any more be called the father of Telemachus, if I take thee not, and strip off thy raiment, thy cloak, and thy tunic that cover thy nakedness, and for thyself send thee wailing to the swift ships, beaten forth from the place of gathering with shameful blows.
341. So spake Odysseus, and with his staff smote his back and shoulders; and Thersites cowered down, and a big tear fell from him, and a bloody weal rose up on his back beneath the staff of gold.
342. Then he sate him down, and fear came upon him, and stung by pain with helpless looks he wiped away the tear.
343. But the Achaeans, sore vexed at heart though they were, broke into a merry laugh at him, and thus would one speak with a glance at his neighbour:
344. Out upon it !
345. verily hath Odysseus ere now wrought good deeds without number as leader in good counsel and setting battle in army, but now is this deed far the best that he hath wrought among the Argives, seeing he hath made this scurrilous babbler to cease from his prating.
346. Never again, I ween, will his proud spirit henceforth set him on to rail at kings with words of reviling.
347. So spake the multitude; but up rose Odysseus, sacker of cities, the sceptre in his hand, and by his side flashing - eyed Athene, in the likeness of a herald, bade the host keep silence, that the sons of the Achaeans, both the nearest and the farthest, might hear his words, and lay to heart his counsel.
348. He with good intent addressed their gathering and spake among them: Son of Atreus, now verily are the Achaeans minded to make thee, O king, the most despised among all mortal men, nor will they fulfill the promise that they made to thee, while faring hitherward from Argos, the pasture - land of horses, that not until thou hadst sacked well - walled Ilios shouldest thou get thee home.
349. For like little children or widow women do they wail each to the other in longing to return home.
350. Verily there is toil enough to make a man return disheartened.
351. For he that abideth but one single month far from his wife in his benched ship hath vexation of heart, even he whom winter blasts and surging seas keep afar; but for us is the ninth year at its turn, while we abide here; wherefore I count it not shame that the Achaeans have vexation of heart beside their beaked ships; yet even so it is a shameful thing to tarry long, and return empty.
352. Endure, my friends, and abide for a time, that we may know whether the prophecies of Calchas be true, or no.
353. For this in truth do we know well in our hearts, and ye are all witnesses thereto, even as many as the fates of death have not borne away.
354. It was but as yesterday or the day before, when the ships of the Achaeans were gathering in Aulis, laden with woes for Priam and the Trojans; and we round about a spring were offering to the immortals upon the holy altars hecatombs that bring fulfillment, beneath a fair plane - tree from whence flowed the bright water; then appeared a great portent: a serpent, blood - red on the back, terrible, whom the Olympian himself had sent forth to the light, glided from beneath the altar and darted to the plane-tree.
355. Now upon this were the younglings of a sparrow, tender little ones, on the topmost bough, cowering beneath the leaves, eight in all, and the mother that bare them was the ninth, Then the serpent devoured them as they twittered piteously, and the mother fluttered around them, wailing for her dear little ones; howbeit he coiled himself and caught her by the wing as she screamed about him.
356. But when he had devoured the sparrow's little ones and the mother with them, the god, who had brought him to the light, made him to be unseen; for the son of crooked - counselling Cronos turned him to stone; and we stood there and marveled at what was wrought.
357. So, when the dread portent brake in upon the hecatombs of the gods, then straightway did Calchas prophesy, and address our gathering, saying:' Why are ye thus silent, ye long - haired Achaeans?
358. To us hath Zeus the counsellor shewed this great sign, late in coming, late in fulfillment, the fame whereof shall never perish.
359. Even as this serpent devoured the sparrow's little ones and the mother with them — the eight, and the mother that bare them was the ninth — so shall we war there for so many years, but in the tenth shall we take the broad - wayed city.'
360. On this wise spake Calchas, and now all this is verily being brought to pass.
361. Nay, come, abide ye all, ye well - greaved Achaeans, even where ye are, until we take the great city of Priam.
362. So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, and all round about them the ships echoed wondrously beneath the shouting of the Achaeans, as they praised the words of godlike Odysseus.
363. And there spake among them the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia:
364. Now look you; in very truth are ye holding assembly after the manner of silly boys that care no whit for deeds of war.
365. What then is to be the end of our compacts and our oaths?
366. Nay, into the fire let us cast all counsels and plans of warriors, the drink - offerings of unmixed wine, and the hand - clasps wherein we put our trust.
367. For vainly do we wrangle with words, nor can we find any device at all, for all our long - tarrying here.
368. Son of Atreus, do thou as of old keep unbending purpose, and be leader of the Argives throughout stubborn fights; and for these, let them perish, the one or two of the Achaeans, that take secret counsel apart — yet no accomplishment shall come therefrom — to depart first to Argos or ever we have learned whether the promise of Zeus that beareth the aegis be a lie or no.
369. For I declare that Cronos' son, supreme in might, gave promise with his nod on that day when the Argives went on board their swift - faring ships, bearing unto the Trojans death and fate; for he lightened on our right and shewed forth signs of good.
370. Wherefore let no man make haste to depart homewards until each have lain with the wife of some Trojan, and have got him requital for his strivings and groanings for Helen's sake.
371. Howbeit, if any man is exceeding fain to depart homewards, let him lay his hand upon his black, well - benched ship, that before the face of all he may meet death and fate.
372. But do thou, O King, thyself take good counsel, and hearken to another; the word whatsoever I speak, shalt thou not lightly cast aside.
373. Separate thy men by tribes, by clans, Agamemnon, that clan may bear aid to clan and tribe to tribe.
374. If thou do thus, and the Achaeans obey thee, thou wilt know then who among thy captains is a coward, and who among thy men, and who too is brave; for they will fight each clan for itself.
375. So shalt thou know whether it is even by the will of heaven that thou shalt not take the city, or by the cowardice of thy folk and their witlessness in war.
376. Then in answer to him spake the king, Agamemnon:
377. Aye verily once more, old sir, art thou pre-eminent in speech above the sons of the Achaeans.
378. I would, O father Zeus and Athene and Apollo, that I had ten such counsellors; then would the city of king Priam forthwith bow her head, taken and laid waste beneath our hands.
379. But the son of Cronos, even Zeus that beareth the aegis, hath brought sorrows upon me, in that he casteth me into the midst of fruitless strifes and wranglings.
380. For verily I and Achilles fought about a girl with violent words, and it was I that waxed wroth the first; but if e'er we shall be at one in counsel, then shall there no more be any putting off of evil for the Trojans, no not for an instant.
381. But for this present go ye to your meal, that we may join battle.
382. Let every man whet well his spear and bestow well his shield, and let him well give to his swift - footed horses their food, and look well to his chariot on every side, and bethink him of fighting; that the whole day through we may contend in hateful war.
383. For of respite shall there intervene, no, not a whit, until night at its coming shall part the fury of warriors.
384. Wet with sweat about the breast of many a man shall be the baldric of his sheltering shield, and about the spear shall his hand grow weary, and wet with sweat shall a man's horse be, as he tugs at the polished car.
385. But whomsoever I shall see minded to tarry apart from the fight beside the beaked ships, for him shall there be no hope thereafter to escape the dogs and birds.
386. So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud as a wave against a high headland, when the South Wind cometh and maketh it to swell — even against a jutting crag that is never left by the waves of all the winds that come from this side or from that.
387. And they arose and hasted to scatter among the ships, and made fires in the huts, and took their meal.
388. And they made sacrifice one to one of the gods that are for ever, and one to another, with the prayer that they might escape from death and the toil of war.
389. But Agamemnon, king of men, slew a fat bull of five years to the son of Cronos, supreme in might, and let call the elders, the chieftains of the Achaean host, Nestor, first of all, and king Idomeneus, and thereafter the twain Aiantes and the son of Tydeus, and as the sixth Odysseus, the peer of Zeus in counsel.
390. And unbidden came to him Menelaus, good at the war-cry, for he knew in his heart wherewith his brother was busied.
391. About the bull they stood and took up the barley grains, and in prayer lord Agamemnon spake among them, saying.
392. Zeus, most glorious, most great, lord of the dark clouds, that dwellest in the heaven, grant that the sun set not, neither darkness come upon us, until I have cast down in headlong ruin the hall of Priam, blackened with smoke, and have burned with consuming fire the portals thereof, and cloven about the breast of Hector his tunic, rent with the bronze; and in throngs may his comrades round about him fall headlong in the dust, and bite the earth.
393. So spake he; but not as yet would the son of Cronos grant him fulfillment; nay, he accepted the sacrifice, but toil he made to wax unceasingly.
394. Then, when they had prayed and had sprinkled the barley grains, they first drew back the victims' heads and cut their throats, and flayed them; and they cut out the thigh - pieces and covered them with a double layer of fat, and laid raw flesh thereon.
395. These they burned on billets of wood stripped of leaves, and the inner parts they pierced with spits, and held them over the flame of Hephaestus.
396. But when the thigh - pieces were wholly burned and they had tasted of the inner parts, they cut up the rest and spitted it, and roasted it carefully, and drew all off the spits.
397. Then, when they had ceased from their labour and had made ready the meal, they feasted, nor did their hearts lack aught of the equal feast.
398. But when they had put from them the desire of food and drink, among them the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, was first to speak, saying:
399. Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, let us now not any more remain gathered here, nor any more put off the work which verily the god vouchsafeth us.
400. Nay, come, let the heralds of the brazen - coated Achaeans make proclamation, and gather together the host throughout the ships, and let us go thus in a body through the broad camp of the Achaeans, that we may with the more speed stir up sharp battle.
401. So spake he, and the king of men, Agamemnon, failed not to hearken.
402. Straightway he bade the clear-voiced heralds summon to battle the long - haired Achaeans.
403. And they made summons, and the host gathered full quickly.
404. The kings, nurtured of Zeus, that were about Atreus' son, sped swiftly, marshalling the host, and in their midst was the flashing - eyed Athene, bearing the priceless aegis, that knoweth neither age nor death, wherefrom are hung an hundred tassels all of gold, all of them cunningly woven, and each one of the worth of an hundred oxen.
405. Therewith she sped dazzling throughout the host of the Achaeans, urging them to go forth; and in the heart of each man she roused strength to war and to battle without ceasing.
406. And to them forthwith war became sweeter than to return in their hollow ships to their dear native land.
407. Even as a consuming fire maketh a boundless forest to blaze on the peaks of a mountain, and from afar is the glare thereof to be seen, even so from their innumerable bronze, as they marched forth, went the dazzling gleam up through the sky unto the heavens.
408. And as the many tribes of winged fowl, wild geese or cranes or long - necked swans on the Asian mead by the streams of Caystrius, fly this way and that, glorying in their strength of wing, and with loud cries settle ever onwards, and the mead resoundeth; even so their many tribes poured forth from ships and huts into the plain of Scamander, and the earth echoed wondrously beneath the tread of men and horses.
409. So they took their stand in the flowery mead of Scamander, numberless, as are the leaves and the flowers in their season.
410. Even as the many tribes of swarming flies that buzz to and fro throughout the herdsman's farmstead in the season of spring, when the milk drenches the pails, even in such numbers stood the long - haired Achaeans upon the plain in the face of the men of Troy, eager to rend them asunder.
411. And even as goatherds separate easily the wide - scattered flocks of goats, when they mingle in the pasture, so did their leaders marshal them on this side and on that to enter into the battle, and among them lord Agamemnon, his eyes and head like unto Zeus that hurleth the thunderbolt, his waist like unto Ares, and his breast unto Poseidon.
412. Even as a bull among the herd stands forth far the chiefest over all, for that he is pre-eminent among the gathering kine, even such did Zeus make Agamemnon on that day, pre-eminent among many, and chiefest amid warriors.
413. Tell me now, ye Muses that have dwellings on Olympus — for ye are goddesses and are at hand and know all things, whereas we hear but a rumour and know not anything — who were the captains of the Danaans and their lords.
414. But the common folk I could not tell nor name, nay, not though ten tongues were mine and ten mouths and a voice unwearying, and though the heart within me were of bronze, did not the Muses of Olympus, daughters of Zeus that beareth the aegis, call to my mind all them that came beneath Ilios.
415. Now will I tell the captains of the ships and the ships in their order.
416. Of the Boeotians Peneleos and Leïtus were captains, and Arcesilaus and Prothoënor and Clonius; these were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky Aulis and Schoenus and Scolus and Eteonus with its many ridges, Thespeia, Graea, and spacious Mycalessus; and that dwelt about Harma and Eilesium and Erythrae; and that held Eleon and Hyle and Peteon, Ocalea and Medeon, the well - built citadel, Copae, Eutresis, and Thisbe, the haunt of doves; that dwelt in Coroneia and grassy Haliartus, and that held Plataea and dwelt in Glisas; that held lower Thebe, the well - built citadel, and holy Onchestus, the bright grove of Poseidon; and that held Arne, rich in vines, and Mideia and sacred Nisa and Anthedon on the seaboard.
417. Of these there came fifty ships, and on board of each went young men of the Boeotians an hundred and twenty.
418. And they that dwelt in Aspledon and Orchomenus of the Minyae were led by Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of Ares, whom, in the palace of Actor, son of Azeus, Astyoche, the honoured maiden, conceived of mighty Ares, when she had entered into her upper chamber; for he lay with her in secret.
419. And with these were ranged thirty hollow ships.
420. And of the Phocians Schedius and Epistrophus were captains, sons of great-souled Iphitus, son of Naubolus; these were they that held Cyparissus and rocky Pytho, and sacred Crisa and Daulis and Panopeus; and that dwelt about Anemoreia and Hyampolis, and that lived beside the goodly river Cephisus, and that held Lilaea by the springs of Cephisus.
421. With these followed forty black ships.
422. And their leaders busily marshalled the ranks of the Phocians, and made ready for battle hard by the Boeotians on the left.
423. And the Loerians had as leader the swift son of Oïleus, Aias the less, in no wise as great as Telamonian Aias, but far less.
424. Small of stature was he, with corselet of linen, but with the spear he far excelled the whole host of Hellenes and Achaeans.
425. These were they that dwelt in Cynus and Opus and Calliarus and Bessa and Scarphe and lovely Augeiae and Tarphe and Thronium about the streams of Boagrius.
426. With Aias followed forty black ships of the Locrians that dwell over against sacred Euboea.
427. And the Abantes, breathing fury, that held Euboea and Chalcis and Eretria and Histiaea, rich in vines, and Cerinthus, hard by the sea, and the steep citadel of Dios; and that held Carystus and dwelt in Styra, — all these again had as leader Elephenor, scion of Ares, him that was son of Chalcodon and captain of the great-souled Abantes.
428. And with him followed the swift Abantes, with hair long at the back, spearmen eager with outstretched ashen spears to rend the corselets about the breasts of the foemen.
429. And with him there followed forty black ships.
430. And they that held Athens, the well - built citadel, the land of great-hearted Erechtheus, whom of old Athene, daughter of Zeus, fostered, when the earth, the giver of grain, had borne him; and she made him to dwell in Athens, in her own rich sanctuary, and there the youths of the Athenians, as the years roll on in their courses, seek to win his favour with sacrifices of bulls and rams; — these again had as leader Menestheus, son of Peteos.
431. Like unto him was none other man upon the face of the earth for the marshalling of chariots and of warriors that bear the shield.
432. Only Nestor could vie with him, for he was the elder.
433. And with him there followed fifty black ships.
434. And Aias led from Salamis twelve ships, and stationed them where the battalions of the Athenians stood.
435. And they that held Argos and Tiryns, famed for its walls, and Hermione and Asine, that enfold the deep gulf, Troezen and Eïonae and vine - clad Epidaurus, and the youths of the Achaeans that held Aegina and Mases, — these again had as leaders Diomedes, good at the war-cry, and Sthenelus, dear son of glorious Capaneus.
436. And with them came a third, Euryalus, a godlike warrior, son of king Mecisteus, son of Talaus; but leader over them all was Diomedes, good at the war-cry.
437. And with these there followed eighty black ships.
438. And they that held Mycenae, the well - built citadel, and wealthy Corinth, and well - built Cleonae, and dwelt in Orneiae and lovely Araethyrea and Sicyon, wherein at the first Adrastus was king; and they that held Hyperesia and steep Gonoessa and Pellene, and that dwelt about Aegium and throughout all Aegialus, and about broad Helice, — of these was the son of Atreus, lord Agamemnon, captain, with an hundred ships.
439. With him followed most people by far and goodliest; and among them he himself did on his gleaming bronze, a king all - glorious, and was pre-eminent among all the warriors, for that he was noblest, and led a people far the most in number.
440. And they that held the hollow land of Lacedaemon with its many ravines, and Pharis and Sparta and Messe, the haunt of doves, and that dwelt in Bryseiae and lovely Augeiae, and that held Amyclae and Helus, a citadel hard by the sea, and that held Laas, and dwelt about Oetylus, — these were led by Agamemnon's brother, even Menelaus, good at the war-cry, with sixty ships; and they were marshalled apart.
441. And himself he moved among them, confident in his zeal, urging his men to battle; and above all others was his heart fain to get him requital for his strivings and groanings for Helen's sake.
442. And they that dwelt in Pylos and lovely Arene and Thryum, the ford of Alpheius, and fair - founded Aepy, and that had their abodes in Cyparisseïs and Amphigeneia and Pteleos and Helus and Dorium, where the Muses met Thamyris the Thracian and made an end of his singing, even as he was journeying from Oechalia, from the house of Eurytus the Oechalian: for he vaunted with boasting that he would conquer, were the Muses themselves to sing against him, the daughters of Zeus that beareth the aegis; but they in their wrath maimed him, and took from him his wondrous song, and made him forget his minstrelsy; — all these folk again had as leader the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia.
443. And with him were ranged ninety hollow ships.
444. And they that held Arcadia beneath the steep mountain of Cyllene, beside the tomb of Aepytus, where are warriors that fight in close combat; and they that dwelt in Pheneos and Orchomenus, rich in flocks, and Rhipe and Stratia and wind - swept Enispe; and that held Tegea and lovely Mantineia; and that held Stymphalus and dwelt in Parrhasia, — all these were led by the son of Ancaeus, Lord Agapenor, with sixty ships; and on each ship embarked full many Arcadian warriors well - skilled in fight.
445. For of himself had the king of men, Agamemnon, given them benched ships wherewith to cross over the wine - dark sea, even the son of Atreus, for with matters of seafaring had they naught to do.
446. And they that dwelt in Buprasium and goodly Elis, all that part thereof that Hyrmine and Myrsinus on the seaboard and the rock of Olen and Alesium enclose between them — these again had four leaders, and ten swift ships followed each one, and many Epeians embarked thereon.
447. Of these some were led by Amphimachus and Thalpius, of the blood of Actor, sons, the one of Cteatus and the other of Eurytus; and of some was the son of Amarynceus captain, even mighty Diores; and of the fourth company godlike Polyxeinus was captain, son of king Agasthenes, Augeias' son.
448. And those from Dulichiuni and the Echinae, the holy isles, that lie across the sea, over against Elis, these again had as leader Meges, the peer of Ares, even the son of Phyleus, whom the horseman Phyleus, dear to Zeus, begat — he that of old had gone to dwell in Dulichium in wrath against his father.
449. And with Meges there followed forty black ships.
450. And Odysseus led the great-souled Cephallenians that held Ithaca and Neritum, covered with waving forests, and that dwelt in Crocyleia and rugged Aegilips; and them that held Zacynthus, and that dwelt about Samos, and held the mainland and dwelt on the shores over against the isles.
451. Of these was Odysseus captain, the peer of Zeus in counsel.
452. And with him there followed twelve ships with vermilion prows.
453. And the Aetolians were led by Thoas, Andraemon's son, even they that dwelt in Pleuron and Olenus and Pylene and Chalcis, hard by the sea, and rocky Calydon.
454. For the sons of great-hearted Oeneus were no more, neither did he himself still live, and fair - haired Meleager was dead, to whom had commands been given that he should bear full sway among the Aetolians.
455. And with Thoas there followed forty black ships.
456. And the Cretans had as leader Idomeneus, famed for his spear, even they that held Cnosus and Gortys, famed for its walls, Lyctus and Miletus and Lycastus, white with chalk, and Phaestus and Rhytium, well - peopled cities; and all they beside that dwelt in Crete of the hundred cities.
457. Of all these was Idomeneus, famed for his spear, captain, and Meriones, the peer of Enyalius, slayer of men.
458. And with these there followed eighty black ships.
459. And Tlepolemus, son of Heracles, a valiant man and tall, led from Rhodes nine ships of the lordly Rhodians, that dwelt in Rhodes sundered in three divisions — in Lindos and Ialysus and Cameirus, white with chalk.
460. These were led by Tlepolemus, famed for his spear, he that was born to mighty Heracles by Astyocheia, whom he had led forth out of Ephyre from the river Selleïs, when he had laid waste many cities of warriors fostered of Zeus.
461. But when Tlepolemus had grown to manhood in the well - fenced palace, forthwith he slew his own father's dear uncle, Licymnius, scion of Ares, who was then waxing old.
462. So he straightway built him ships, and when he had gathered together much people, went forth in flight over the sea, for that the other sons and grandsons of mighty Heracles threatened him.
463. But he came to Rhodes in his wanderings, suffering woes, and there his people settled in three divisions by tribes, and were loved of Zeus that is king among gods and men; and upon them was wondrous wealth poured by the son of Cronos.
464. Moreover Nireus led three shapely ships from Syme, Nireus that was son of Aglaïa and Charops the king, Nireus the comeliest man that came beneath Ilios of all the Danaans after the fearless son of Peleus.
465. Howbeit he was a weakling, and but few people followed with him.
466. And they that held Nisyrus and Crapathus and Casus and Cos, the city of Eurypylus, and the Calydnian isles, these again were led by Pheidippus and Antiphus, the two sons of king Thessalus, son of Heracles.
467. And with them were ranged thirty hollow ships.
468. Now all those again that inhabited Pelasgian Argos, and dwelt in Alos and Alope and Trachis, and that held Phthia and Hellas, the land of fair women, and were called Myrmidons and Hellenes and Achaeans — of the fifty ships of these men was Achilles captain.
469. Howbeit they bethought them not of dolorous war, since there was no man to lead them forth into the ranks.
470. For he lay in idleness among the ships, the swift - footed, goodly Achilles, in wrath because of the fair - haired girl Briseïs, whom he had taken out of Lyrnessus after sore toil, when he wasted Lyrnessus and the walls of Thebe, and laid low Mynes and Epistrophus, warriors that raged with the spear, sons of king Evenus, Selepus' son.
471. In sore grief for her lay Achilles idle; but soon was he to arise again.
472. And they that held Phylace and flowery Pyrasus, the sanctuary of Demeter, and Iton, mother of flocks, and Antron, hard by the sea, and Pteleos, couched in grass, these again had as leader warlike Protesilaus, while yet he lived; howbeit ere now the black earth held him fast.
473. His wife, her two cheeks torn in wailing, was left in Phylace and his house but half established, while, for himself, a Dardanian warrior slew him as he leapt forth from his ship by far the first of the Achaeans.
474. Yet neither were his men leaderless, though they longed for their leader; for Podarces, scion of Ares, marshalled them, he that was son of Phylacus' son, Iphiclus, rich in flocks, own brother to great-souled Protesilaus, and younger - born; but the other was the elder and the better man, even the warrior, valiant Protesilaus.
475. So the host in no wise lacked a leader, though they longed for the noble man they had lost.
476. And with him there followed forty black ships.
477. And they that dwelt in Pherae beside the lake Boebeïs, and in Boebe, and Glaphyrae, and well - built Iolcus, these were led by the dear son of Admetus with eleven ships, even by Eumelus, whom Alcestis, queenly among women, bare to Admetus, even she, the comeliest of the daughters of Pelias.
478. And they that dwelt in Methone and Thaumacia, and that held Meliboea and rugged Olizon, these with their seven ships were led by Philoctetes, well - skilled in archery, and on each ship embarked fifty oarsmen well skilled to fight amain with the bow.
479. But Philoctetes lay suffering grievous pains in an island, even in sacred Lemnos, where the sons of the Achaeans had left him in anguish with an evil wound from a deadly water - snake.
480. There he lay suffering; yet full soon were the Argives beside their ships to bethink them of king Philoctetes.
481. Howbeit neither were these men leaderless, though they longed for their leader; but Medon marshalled them, the bastard son of Oïleus, whom Rhene bare to Oïleus, sacker of cities.
482. And they that held Tricca and Ithome of the crags, and Oechalia, city of Oechalian Eurytus, these again were led by the two sons of Asclepius, the skilled leeches Podaleirius and Machaon.
483. And with these were ranged thirty hollow ships.
484. And they that held Ormenius and the fountain Hypereia, and that held Asterium and the white crests of Titanus, these were led by Eurypylus, the glorious son of Euaemon.
485. And with him there followed forty black ships.
486. And they that held Argissa, and dwelt in Gyrtone, Orthe, and Elone, and the white city of Oloösson, these again had as leader Polypoetes, staunch in fight, son of Peirithous, whom immortal Zeus begat — even him whom glorious Hippodameia conceived to Peirithous on the day when he got him vengeance on the shaggy centaurs, and thrust them forth from Pelium, and drave them to the Aethices.
487. Not alone was he, but with him was Leonteus, scion of Ares, the son of Caenus' son, Coronus, high of heart.
488. And with them there followed forty black ships.
489. And Gouneus led from Cyphus two and twenty ships, and with him followed the Enienes and the Peraebi, staunch in fight, that had set their dwellings about wintry Dodona, and dwelt in the ploughland about lovely Titaressus, that poureth his fair - flowing streams into Peneius; yet doth he not mingle with the silver eddies of Peneius, but floweth on over his waters like unto olive oil; for that he is a branch of the water of Styx, the dread river of oath.
490. And the Magnetes had as captain Prothous, son of Tenthredon.
491. These were they that dwelt about Peneius and Pelion, covered with waving forests.
492. Of these was swift Prothous captain; and with him there followed forty black ships.
493. These were the leaders of the Danaans and their lords.
494. But who was far the best among them do thou tell me, Muse — best of the warriors and of the horses that followed with the sons of Atreus.
495. Of horses best by far were the mares of the son of Pheres, those that Eumelas drave, swift as birds, like of coat, like of age, their backs as even as a levelling line could make.
496. These had Apollo of the silver bow reared in Pereia, both of them mares, bearing with them the panic of war.
497. And of warriors far best was Telamonian Aias, while yet Achilles cherished his wrath; for Achilles was far the mightiest, he and the horses that bare the peerless son of Peleus.
498. Howbeit he abode amid his beaked, seafaring ships in utter wrath against Agamemnon, Atreus' son, shepherd of the host; and his people along the sea-shore took their joy in casting the discus and the javelin, and in archery; and their horses each beside his own car, eating lotus and parsley of the marsh, stood idle, while the chariots were set, well covered up, in the huts of their masters.
499. But the men, longing for their captain, dear to Ares, roared hither and thither through the camp, and fought not.
500. So marched they then as though all the land were swept with fire; and the earth groaned beneath them, as beneath Zeus that hurleth the thunderbolt in his wrath, when he scourgeth the land about Typhoeus in the country of the Arimi, where men say is the couch of Typhoeus.
501. Even so the earth groaned greatly beneath their tread as they went; and full swiftly did they speed across the plain.
502. And to the Trojans went, as a messenger from Zeus that beareth the aegis, wind - footed, swift Iris with a grievous message.
503. These were holding assembly at Priam's gate, all gathered in one body, the young men alike and the elders.
504. And swift - footed Iris stood near and spake to them; and she made her voice like to that of Polites, son of Priam, who was wont to sit as a sentinel of the Trojans, trusting in his fleetness of foot, on the topmost part of the barrow of aged Aesyetes, awaiting until the Achaeans should sally forth from their ships.
505. Likening herself to him swifted - footed Iris spake to Priam, saying:
506. Old sir, ever are endless words dear to thee, now even as of yore in time of peace; but war unabating is afoot.
507. Verily full often have I entered ere now into battles of warriors, but never yet have I seen a host so goodly and so great; for most like to the leaves or the sands are they, as they march over the plain to fight against the city.
508. Hector, to thee beyond all others do I give command, and do thou even according to my word.
509. Inasmuch as there are allies full many throughout the great city of Priam, and tongue differs from tongue among men that are scattered abroad; let each one therefore give the word to those whose captain he is, and these let him lead forth, when he has marshalled the men of his own city.
510. So spake she, and Hector in no wise failed to know the voice of the goddess, but forthwith brake up the gathering; and they rushed to arms.
511. The gates one and all were opened wide, and forth the folk hasted, both footmen and charioteers; and a great din arose.
512. Now there is before the city a steep mound afar out in the plain, with a clear space about it on this side and on that; this do men verily call Batieia, but the immortals call it the barrow of Myrine, light of step.
513. There on this day did the Trojans and their allies separate their companies.
514. The Trojans were led by great Hector of the flashing helm, the son of Priam, and with him were marshalled the greatest hosts by far and the goodliest, raging with the spear.
515. Of the Dardanians again the valiant son of Anchises was captain, even Aeneas, whom fair Aphrodite conceived to Anchises amid the spurs of Ida, a goddess couched with a mortal man.
516. Not alone was he; with him were Antenor's two sons, Archelochus and Acamas, well skilled in all manner of fighting.
517. And they that dwelt in Zeleia beneath the nethermost foot of Ida, men of wealth, that drink the dark water of Aesepus, even the Troes, these again were led by the glorious son of Lycaon, Pandarus, to whom Apollo himself gave the bow.
518. And they that held Adrasteia and the land of Apaesus, and that held Pityeia and the steep mount of Tereia, these were led by Adrastus and Araphius, with corslet of linen, sons twain of Merops of Percote, that was above all men skilled in prophesying, and would not suffer his sons to go into war, the bane of men.
519. But the twain would in no wise hearken, for the fates of black death were leading them on.
520. And they that dwelt about Percote and Practius, and that held Sestus and Abydus and goodly Arisbe, these again were led by Hyrtacus' son Asius, a leader of men —
521. Asius, son of Hyrtacus, whom his horses tawny and tall had borne from Arisbe, from the river Selleïs.
522. And Hippothous led the tribes of the Pelasgi, that rage with the spear, even them that dwelt in deep-soiled Larisa; these were led by Hippothous and Pylaeus, scion of Ares, sons twain of Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus.
523. But the Thracians Acamas led and Peirous, the warrior, even all them that the strong stream of the Hellespont encloseth.
524. And Euphemus was captain of the Ciconian spearmen, the son of Ceas' son Troezenus, nurtured of Zeus.
525. But Pyraechmes led the Paeonians, with curved bows, from afar, out of Amydon from the wide - flowing Axius — Axius the water whereof floweth the fairest over the face of the earth.
526. And the Paphlagonians did Pylaemenes of the shaggy heart lead from the land of the Eneti, whence is the race of wild she-mules.
527. These were they that held Cytorus and dwelt about Sesamon, and had their famed dwellings around the river Parthenius and Cromna and Aegialus and lofty Erythini.
528. But of the Halizones Odius and Epistrophus were captains from afar, from Alybe, where is the birth - place of silver.
529. And of the Mysians the captains were Chromis and Ennomus the augur; howbeit with his auguries he warded not off black fate, but was slain beneath the hands of the son of Aeacus, swift of foot, in the river, where Achilles was making havoc of the Trojans and the others as well.
530. And Phorcys and godlike Ascanius led the Phrygians from afar, from Ascania, and were eager to fight in the press of battle.
531. And the Maeonians had captains twain, Mesthles and Antiphus, the two sons of TaIaemenes, whose mother was the nymph of the Gygaean lake; and they led the Maeonians, whose birth was beneath Tmolas.
532. And Nastes again led the Carians, uncouth of speech, who held Miletus and the mountain of Phthires, dense with its leafage, and the streams of Maeander, and the steep crests of Mycale.
533. These were led by captains twain, Amphimachus and Nastes — Nastes and Amphimachus, the glorious children of Nomion.
534. And he came to the war all decked with gold, like a girl, fool that he was; but his gold in no wise availed to ward off woeful destruction; nay, he was slain in the river beneath the hands of the son of Aeacus, swift of foot; and Achilles, wise of heart, bare off the gold.
535. And Sarpedon and peerless Glaucus were captains of the Lycians from afar out of Lycia, from the eddying Xanthus.
536. Now when they were marshalled, the several companies with their captains, the Trojans came on with clamour and with a cry like birds, even as the clamour of cranes ariseth before the face of heaven, when they flee from wintry storms and measureless rain, and with clamour fly toward the streams of Ocean, bearing slaughter and death to Pigmy men, and in the early dawn they offer evil battle.
537. But the Achaeans came on in silence, breathing fury, eager at heart to bear aid each man to his fellow.
538. Even as when the South Wind sheddeth a mist over the peaks of a mountain, a mist that the shepherd loveth not, but that to the robber is better than night, and a man can see only so far as he casteth a stone; even in such wise rose the dense dust - cloud from beneath their feet as they went; and full swiftly did they speed across the plain.
539. Now when they were come near, as they advanced one host against the other, among the Trojans there stood forth as champion godlike Alexander, bearing upon his shoulders a panther skin and his curved bow, and his sword; and brandishing two spears tipped with bronze he challenged all the best of Argives to fight with him face to face in dread combat.
540. But when Menelaus, dear to Ares, was ware of him as he came forth before the throng with long strides, then even as a lion is glad when he lighteth on a great carcase, having found a horned stag or a wild goat when he is hungry; for greedily doth he devour it, even though swift dogs and lusty youths set upon him: even so was Menelaus glad when his eyes beheld godlike Alexander; for he thought that he had gotten him vengeance on the sinner.
541. And forthwith he leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground.
542. But when godlike Alexander was ware of him as he appeared among the champions, his heart was smitten, and back he shrank into the throng of his comrades, avoiding fate.
543. And even as a man at sight of a snake in the glades of a mountain starteth back, and trembling seizeth his limbs beneath him, and he withdraweth back again and pallor layeth hold of his cheeks; even so did godlike Alexander, seized with fear of Atreus' son, shrink back into the throng of the lordly Trojans.
544. But Hector saw him, and chid him with words of shame: Evil Paris, most fair to look upon, thou that art mad after women, thou beguiler, would that thou hadst ne'er been born and hadst died unwed.
545. Aye, of that were I fain, and it had been better far than that thou shouldest thus be a reproach, and that men should look upon thee in scorn.
546. Verily, methinks, will the long - haired Achaeans laugh aloud, deeming that a prince is our champion because a comely form is his, while there is no strength in his heart nor any valour.
547. Was it in such strength as this that thou didst sail over the main in thy seafaring ships, when thou hadst gathered thy trusty comrades, and, coming to an alien folk, didst bring back a comely woman from a distant land, even a daughter of warriors who wield the spear, but to thy father and city and all the people a grievous bane — to thy foes a joy, but to thine own self a hanging down of the head?
548. Wilt thou indeed not abide Menelaus, dear to Ares?
549. Thou wouldest learn what manner of warrior he is whose lovely wife thou hast.
550. Then will thy lyre help thee not, neither the gifts of Aphrodite, thy locks and thy comeliness, when thou shalt lie low in the dust.
551. Nay, verily, the Trojans are utter cowards: else wouldest thou ere this have donned a coat of stone by reason of all the evil thou hast wrought.
552. And to him did godlike Alexander make answer, saying:
553. Hector, seeing that thou dost chide me duly, and not beyond what is due — ever is thy heart unyielding, even as an axe that is driven through a beam by the hand of man that skilfully shapeth a ship's timber, and it maketh the force of his blow to wax; even so is the heart in thy breast undaunted — cast not in my teeth the lovely gifts of golden Aphrodite.
554. Not to be flung aside, look you, are the glorious gifts of the gods, even all that of themselves they give, whereas by his own will could no man win them.
555. But now, if thou wilt have me war and do battle, make the other Trojans to sit down and all the Achaeans, but set ye me in the midst and Menelaus, dear to Ares, to do battle for Helen and all her possessions.
556. And whichsoever of us twain shall win, and prove him the better man, let him duly take all the wealth and the woman, and bear them to his home.
557. But for you others, do ye swear friendship and oaths of faith with sacrifice.
558. So should ye dwell in deep-soiled Troyland, and let them return to Argos, pasture - land of horses, and to Achaea, the land of fair women.
559. So spake he, and Hector rejoiced greatly when he heard his words; and he went into the midst, and kept back the battalions of the Trojans with his spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them down.
560. But the long - haired Achaeans sought the while to aim their arrows at him, and to smite him, and to cast at him with stones.
561. But aloud shouted Agamemnon, king of men: Hold, ye Argives, shoot no more, ye youths of the Achaeans; for Hector of the flashing helm makes as though he would say somewhat.
562. So spake he, and they stayed them from battle, and became silent forthwith.
563. And Hector spake between the two hosts:
564. Hear from me, ye Trojans and well - greaved Achaeans, the words of Alexander, for whose sake strife hath been set afoot.
565. The other Trojans and all the Achaeans he biddeth to lay aside their goodly battle - gear upon the bounteous earth, and himself in the midst and Menelaus, dear to Ares, to do battle for Helen and all her possessions.
566. And whichsoever of the twain shall win, and prove him the better man, let him duly take all the wealth and the woman, and bear them to his home; but for us others, let us swear friendship and oaths of faith with sacrifice.
567. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence; and among them spake Menelaus, good at the war -cry:
568. Hearken ye now also unto me, for upon my heart above all others hath sorrow come; my mind is that Argives and Trojans now be parted, seeing ye have suffered many woes because of my quarrel and Alexander's beginning thereof.
569. And for whichsoever of us twain death and fate are appointed, let him lie dead; but be ye others parted with all speed.
570. Bring ye two lambs, a white ram and a black ewe, for Earth and Sun, and for Zeus we will bring another; and fetch ye hither the mighty Priam, that he may himself swear an oath with sacrifice, seeing that his sons are over - weening and faithless; lest any by presumptuous act should do violence to the oaths of Zeus.
571. Ever unstable are the hearts of the young; but in whatsoever an old man taketh part, he looketh both before and after, that the issue may be far the best for either side.
572. So spake he, and the Achaeans and Trojans waxed glad, deeming that they had won rest from woeful war.
573. So they stayed their chariots in the ranks, and themselves stepped forth, and did off their battle - gear.
574. This they laid upon the ground, each hard by each, and there was but little space between.
575. And Hector sent to the city heralds twain with all speed to fetch the lambs and to summon Priam.
576. And Talthybius did lord Agamemnon send forth to the hollow ships, and bade him bring a lamb; and he failed not to hearken to goodly Agamemnon.
577. But Iris went as a messenger to white - armed Helen, in the likeness of her husband's sister, the wife of Antenor's son, even her that lord Helicaon, Antenor's son, had to wife, Laodice, the comeliest of the daughters of Priam.
578. She found Helen in the hall, where she was weaving a great purple web of double fold, and thereon was broidering many battles of the horse - taming Trojans and the brazen - coated Achaeans, that for her sake they had endured at the hands of Ares.
579. Close to her side then came Iris, swift of foot, and spake to her, saying:
580. Come hither, dear lady, that thou mayest behold the wondrous doings of the horse - taming Trojans and the brazen - coated Achaeans.
581. They that of old were wont to wage tearful war against one another on the plain, their hearts set on deadly battle, even they abide now in silence, and the battle has ceased, and they lean upon their shields, and beside them their long spears are fixed.
582. But Alexander and Menelaus, dear to Ares, will do battle with their long spears for thee; and whoso shall conquer, his dear wife shalt thou be called.
583. So spake the goddess, and put into her heart sweet longing for her former lord and her city and parents; and straightway she veiled herself with shining linen, and went forth from her chamber, letting fall round tears, not alone, for with her followed two handmaids as well, Aethra, daughter of Pittheus, and ox -eyed Clymene; and with speed they came to the place where were the Scaean gates.
584. And they that were about Priam and Panthous and Thymoetes and Lampus and Clytius and Hicetaon, scion of Ares, and Ucalegon and Antenor, men of prudence both, sat as elders of the people at the Scaean gates.
585. Because of old age had they now ceased from battle, but speakers they were full good, like unto cicalas that in a forest sit upon a tree and pour forth their lily - like voice; even in such wise sat the leaders of the Trojans upon the wall.
586. Now when they saw Helen coming upon the wall, softly they spake winged words one to another:
587. Small blame that Trojans and well - greaved Achaeans should for such a woman long time suffer woes; wondrously like is she to the immortal goddesses to look upon.
588. But even so, for all that she is such an one, let her depart upon the ships, neither be left here to be a bane to us and to our children after us.
589. So they said, but Priam spake, and called Helen to him:
590. Come hither, dear child, and sit before me, that thou mayest see thy former lord and thy kinsfolk and thy people — thou art nowise to blame in my eyes; it is the gods, methinks, that are to blame, who roused against me the tearful war of the Achaeans — and that thou mayest tell me who is this huge warrior, this man of Achaea so valiant and so tall.
591. Verily there be others that are even taller by a head, but so comely a man have mine eyes never yet beheld, neither one so royal: he is like unto one that is a king.
592. And Helen, fair among women, answered him, saying:
593. Revered art thou in mine eyes, dear father of my husband, and dread.
594. Would that evil death had been my pleasure when I followed thy son hither, and left my bridal chamber and my kinfolk and my daughter, well - beloved, and the lovely companions of my girlhood.
595. But that was not to be; wherefore I pine away with weeping.
596. Howbeit this will I tell thee, whereof thou dost ask and enquire.
597. Yon man is the son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon, that is both a noble king and a valiant spearman.
598. And he was husband's brother to shameless me, as sure as ever such a one there was.
599. So spake she, and the old man was seized with wonder, and said:
600. Ah, happy son of Atreus, child of fortune, blest of heaven; now see I that youths of the Achaeans full many are made subject unto thee.
601. Ere now have I journeyed to the land of Phrygia, rich in vines, and there I saw in multitudes the Phrygian warriors, masters of glancing steeds, even the people of Otreus and godlike Mygdon, that were then encamped along the banks of Sangarius.
602. For I, too, being their ally, was numbered among them on the day when the Amazons came, the peers of men.
603. Howbeit not even they were as many as are the bright -eyed Achaeans.
604. And next the old man saw Odysseus, and asked:
605. Come now, tell me also of yonder man, dear child, who he is.
606. Shorter is he by a head than Agamemnon, son of Atreus, but broader of shoulder and of chest to look upon.
607. His battle - gear lieth upon the bounteous earth, but himself he rangeth like the bell - wether of a herd through the ranks of warriors.
608. Like a ram he seemeth to me, a ram of thick fleece, that paceth through a great flock of white ewes.
609. To him made answer Helen, sprung from Zeus: This again is Laertes' son, Odysseus of many wiles, that was reared in the land of Ithaca, rugged though it be, and he knoweth all manner of craft and cunning devices.
610. Then to her again made answer Antenor, the wise: Lady, this verily is a true word that thou hast spoken, for erstwhile on a time goodly Odysseus came hither also on an embassy concerning thee, together with Menelaus, dear to Ares; and it was I that gave them entertainment and welcomed them in my halls, and came to know the form and stature of them both and their cunning devices.
611. Now when they mingled with the Trojans, as they were gathered together, when they stood Menelaus overtopped him with his broad shoulders; howbeit when the twain were seated Odysseus was the more royal.
612. But when they began to weave the web of speech and of counsel in the presence of all, Menelaus in truth spake fluently, with few words, but very clearly, seeing he was not a man of lengthy speech nor of rambling, though verily in years he was the younger.
613. But whenever Odysseus of many wiles arose, he would stand and look down with eyes fixed upon the ground, and his staff he would move neither backwards nor forwards, but would hold it stiff, in semblance like a man of no understanding; thou wouldest have deemed him a churlish man and naught but a fool.
614. But whenso he uttered his great voice from his chest, and words like snowflakes on a winter's day, then could no mortal man beside vie with Odysseus; then did we not so marvel to behold Odysseus' aspect.
615. And, thirdly, the old man saw Aias, and asked:
616. Who then is this other Achaean warrior, valiant and tall, towering above the Argives with his head and broad shoulders?
617. And to him made answer long - robed Helen, fair among women:
618. This is huge Aias, bulwark of the Achaeans.
619. And Idomeneus over against him standeth amid the Cretans even as a god, and about him are gathered the captains of the Cretans.
620. Full often was Menelaus, dear to Ares, wont to entertain him in our house, whenever he came from Crete.
621. And now all the rest of the bright -eyed Achaeans do I see, whom I could well note, and tell their names; but two marshallers of the host can I not see, Castor, tamer of horses, and the goodly boxer, Polydeuces, even mine own brethren, whom the same mother bare.
622. Either they followed not with the host from lovely Lacedaemon, or though they followed hither in their seafaring ships, they have now no heart to enter into the battle of warriors for fear of the words of shame and the many revilings that are mine.
623. So said she; but they ere now were fast holden of the life - giving earth there in Lacedaemon, in their dear native land.
624. Meanwhile the heralds were bearing through the city the offerings for the holy oaths of the gods, two lambs and, in a goat - skin bottle, wine that maketh glad the heart, the fruit of the earth.
625. And the herald Idaeus bare a shining bowl and golden cups; and he came to the old king's side and roused him, saying:
626. Rise, thou son of Laomedon, the chieftains of the horse - taming Trojans, and of the brazen - coated Achaeans, summon thee to go down into the plain, that ye may swear oaths of faith with sacrifice.
627. But Alexander and Menelaus, dear to Ares, will do battle with long spears for the woman's sake; and whichsoever of the twain shall conquer, him let woman and treasure follow; and we others, swearing friendship and oaths of faith with sacrifice, should then dwell in deep-soiled Troy, but they will depart to Argos, pastureland of horses, and Achaea, the land of fair women.
628. So spake he, and the old man shuddered, yet bade his companions yoke the horses; and they speedily obeyed.
629. Then Priam mounted and drew back the reins, and by his side Antenor mounted the beauteous car; and the twain drave the swift horses through the Scaean gates to the plain.
630. But when they were now come to the Trojans and Achaeans, they stepped forth from the chariot upon the bounteous earth, and went into the midst of the Trojans and Achaeans.
631. Straightway then rose up Agamemnon, king of men, and Odysseus of many wiles, and the lordly heralds brought together the offerings for the holy oaths of the gods, and mixed the wine in the bowl, and poured water over the hands of the kings.
632. And the son of Atreus drew forth with his hand the knife that ever hung beside the great sheath of his sword, and cut hair from off the heads of the lambs; and the heralds portioned it out to the chieftans of the Trojans and Achaeans.
633. Then in their midst Agamemnon lifted up his hands and prayed aloud: Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, and thou Sun, that beholdest all things and hearest all things, and ye rivers and thou earth, and ye that in the world below take vengeance on men that are done with life, whosoever hath sworn a false oath; be ye witnesses, and watch over the oaths of faith.
634. If Alexander slay Menelaus, then let him keep Helen and all her treasure; and we will depart in our seafaring ships.
635. But if so be fair - haired Menelaus shall slay Alexander, then let the Trojans give back Helen and all her treasure, and pay to the Argives in requital such recompense as beseemeth, even such as shall abide in the minds of men that are yet to be.
636. Howbeit, if Priam and the sons of Priam be not minded to pay recompense unto me, when Alexander falleth, then will I fight on even thereafter, to get me recompense, and will abide here until I find an end of war.
637. He spake, and cut the lambs' throats with the pitiless bronze; and laid them down upon the ground gasping and failing of breath, for the bronze had robbed them of their strength.
638. Then they drew wine from the bowl into the cups, and poured it forth, and made prayer to the gods that are for ever.
639. And thus would one of the Achaeans and Trojans say: Zeus, most glorious, most great, and ye other immortal gods, which host soever of the twain shall be first to work harm in defiance of the oaths, may their brains be thus poured forth upon the ground even as this wine, theirs and their children's; and may their wives be made slaves to others.
640. So spake they, but not yet was the son of Cronos to vouchsafe them fulfillment.
641. Then in their midst spake Priam, Dardanus' son, saying: Hearken to me, ye Trojans and well - greaved Achaeans.
642. I verily will go my way back to windy Ilios, since I can in no wise bear to behold with mine eyes my dear son doing battle with Menelaus, dear to Ares.
643. But this, I ween, Zeus knoweth, and the other immortal gods, for which of the twain the doom of death is ordained.
644. So spake the godlike man, and let place the lambs in his chariot, and himself mounted, and drew back the reins, and by his side Antenor mounted the beauteous car; and the twain departed back to Ilios.
645. But Hector, Priam's son, and goodly Odysseus first measured out a space, and thereafter took the lots and shook them in the bronze - wrought helmet, to know which of the twain should first let fly his spear of bronze.
646. And the people made prayer and lifted their hands to the gods; and thus would one of the Achaeans and Trojans speak: Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, whichsoever of the twain it be that brought these troubles upon both peoples, grant that he may die and enter the house of Hades, whereas to us there may come friendship and oaths of faith.
647. So spake they, and great Hector of the flashing helm shook the helmet, looking behind him the while; and straightway the lot of Paris leapt forth.
648. Then the people sate them down in ranks, where were each man's high - stepping horses, and his inlaid armour was set.
649. But goodly Alexander did on about his shoulders his beautiful armour, even he, the lord of fair - haired Helen.
650. The greaves first he set about his legs; beautiful they were, and fitted with silver ankle-pieces; next he did on about his chest the corselet of his brother Lycaon, and fitted it to himself.
651. And about his shoulders he cast his silver - studded sword of bronze, and thereafter his shield great and sturdy; and upon his mighty head he set a well - wrought helmet with horse - hair crest — and terribly did the plume nod from above — and he took a valorous spear, that fitted his grasp.
652. And in the self - same manner warlike Menelaus did on his battle - gear.
653. But when they had armed themselves on either side of the throng, they strode into the space between the Trojans and Achaeans, glaring terribly; and amazement came upon them that beheld, both the Trojans, tamers of horses, and the well - greaved Achaeans; and the twain took their stand near together in the measured space, brandishing their spears in wrath one at the other.
654. First Alexander hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon the son of Atreus' shield that was well balanced on every side; howbeit the bronze brake not through but its point was turned in the stout shield.
655. Next Atreus' son, Menelaus, rushed upon him with his spear, and made prayer to father Zeus: Zeus, our king, grant that I may avenge me on him that was first to do me wrong, even on goodly Alexander, and subdue thou him beneath my hands; that many a one even of men yet to be may shudder to work evil to his host, that hath shown him friendship.
656. He spoke, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled it; and he smote upon the son of Priam's shield, that was well balanced upon every side.
657. Through the bright shield went the mighty spear, and through the corselet, richly dight, did it force its way; and straight on beside his flank the spear shore through his tunic; but he bent aside and escaped black fate.
658. Then the son of Atreus drew his silver - studded sword, and raising himself on high smote the horn of his helmet; but upon it his sword shattered in pieces three, aye, four, and fell from his hand.
659. Then the son of Atreus uttered a bitter cry with a glance at the broad heaven: Father Zeus, than thou is no other god more baleful.
660. Verily I deemed that I had got me vengeance upon Alexander for his wickedness, but now is my sword broken in my hands, and forth from my grasp has my spear flown in vain, and I smote him not.
661. So saying, he sprang upon him, and seized him by the helmet with thick crest of horse - hair, and whirling him about began to drag him towards the well - greaved Achaeans; and Paris was choked by the richly - broidered strap beneath his soft throat, that was drawn tight beneath his chin to hold his helm.
662. And now would Menelaus have dragged him away, and won glory unspeakable, had not Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus, been quick to see, and to his cost broken in twain the thong, cut from the hide of a slaughtered ox; and the empty helm came away in his strong hand.
663. This he then tossed with a swing into the company of the well - greaved Achaeans, and his trusty comrades gathered it up; but himself he sprang back again, eager to slay his foe with spear of bronze.
664. But him Aphrodite snatched up, full easily as a goddess may, and shrouded him in thick mist, and set him down in his fragrant, vaulted chamber, and herself went to summon Helen.
665. Her she found on the high wall, and round about her in throngs were the women of Troy.
666. Then with her hand the goddess laid hold of her fragrant robe, and plucked it, and spake to her in the likeness of an ancient dame, a wool - comber, who had been wont to card the fair wool for her when she dwelt in Lacedaemon, and who was well loved of her; in her likeness fair Aphrodite spake: Come hither; Alexander calleth thee to go to thy home.
667. There is he in his chamber and on his inlaid couch, gleaming with beauty and fair raiment.
668. Thou wouldest not deem that he had come thither from warring with a foe, but rather that he was going to the dance, or sat there as one that had but newly ceased from the dance.
669. So spake she, and stirred Helen's heart in her breast; and when she marked the beauteous neck of the goddess, her lovely bosom, and her flashing eyes, then amazement seized her, and she spake, and addressed her, saying:
670. Strange goddess, why art thou minded to beguile me thus?
671. Verily thou wilt lead me yet further on to one of the well - peopled cities of Phrygia or lovely Maeonia, if there too there be some one of mortal men who is dear to thee, seeing that now Menelaus hath conquered goodly Alexander, and is minded to lead hateful me to his home.
672. It is for this cause that thou art now come hither with guileful thought.
673. Go thou, and sit by his side, and depart from the way of the gods, neither let thy feet any more bear thee back to Olympus; but ever be thou troubled for him, and guard him, until he make thee his wife, or haply his slave.
674. But thither will I not go — it were a shameful thing — to array that man's couch; all the women of Troy will blame me hereafter; and I have measureless griefs at heart.
675. Then stirred to wrath fair Aphrodite spake to her: Provoke me not, rash woman, lest I wax wroth and desert thee, and hate thee, even as now I love thee wondrously; and lest I devise grievous hatred between both, Trojans alike and Danaans; then wouldst thou perish of an evil fate.
676. So spake she, and Helen, sprung from Zeus, was seized with fear; and she went, wrapping herself in her bright shining mantle, in silence; and she was unseen of the Trojan women; and the goddess led the way.
677. Now when they were come to the beautiful palace of Alexander, the handmaids turned forthwith to their tasks, but she, the fair lady, went to the high - roofed chamber.
678. And the goddess, laughter - loving Aphrodite, took for her a chair, and set it before the face of Alexander.
679. Thereon Helen sate her down, the daughter of Zeus that beareth the aegis, with eyes turned askance; and she chid her lord, and said:
680. Thou hast come back from the war; would thou hadst perished there, vanquished by a valiant man that was my former lord.
681. Verily it was thy boast aforetime that thou wast a better man than Menelaus, dear to Ares, in the might of thy hands and with thy spear.
682. But go now, challenge Menelaus, dear to Ares, again to do battle with thee, man to man.
683. But, nay, I of myself bid thee refrain, and not war amain against fair - haired Menelaus, nor fight with him in thy folly, lest haply thou be vanquished anon by his spear.
684. Then Paris made answer, and spake to her, saying:
685. Chide not my heart, lady, with hard words of reviling.
686. For this present hath Menelaus vanquished me with Athene's aid, but another time shall I vanquish him; on our side too there be gods.
687. But come, let us take our joy, couched together in love; for never yet hath desire so encompassed my soul — nay, not when at the first I snatched thee from lovely Lacedaemon and sailed with thee on my seafaring ships, and on the isle of Cranae had dalliance with thee on the couch of love — as now I love thee, and sweet desire layeth hold of me.
688. He spake, and led the way to the couch, and with him followed his wife.
689. Thus the twain were couched upon the corded bed; but the son of Atreus ranged through the throng like a wild beast, if anywhere he might have sight of godlike Alexander.
690. But none of the Trojans or their famed allies could then discover Alexander to Menelaus, dear to Ares.
691. Not for love verily were they fain to hide him, could any have seen him, for he was hated of all even as black death.
692. Then the king of men, Agamemnon, spake among them, saying: Hearken to me, ye Trojans and Dardanians and allies.
693. Victory is now of a surety seen to rest with Menelaus, dear to Ares; do ye therefore give up Argive Helen and the treasure with her, and pay ye in requital such recompense as beseemeth, even such as shall abide in the minds of men that are yet to be.
694. So spake the son of Atreus, and all the Achaeans shouted assent.
695. Now the gods, seated by the side of Zeus, were holding assembly on the golden floor, and in their midst the queenly Hebe poured them nectar, and they with golden goblets pledged one the other as they looked forth upon the city of the Trojans.
696. And forthwith the son of Cronos made essay to provoke Hera with mocking words, and said with malice: Twain of the goddesses hath Menelaus for helpers, even Argive Hera, and Alalcomenean Athene.
697. Howbeit these verily sit apart and take their pleasure in beholding, whereas by the side of that other laughter - loving Aphrodite ever standeth, and wardeth from him fate, and but now she saved him, when he thought to perish.
698. But of a surety victory rests with Menelaus, dear to Ares; let us therefore take thought how these things are to be; whether we shall again rouse evil war and the dread din of battle, or put friendship between the hosts.
699. If this might in any wise be welcome to all and their good pleasure, then might the city of king Priam still be an habitation, and Menelaus take back Argive Helen.
700. So spake he, and thereat Athene and Hera murmured, who sat side by side, and were devising ills for the Trojans.
701. Athene verily held her peace and said naught, wroth though she was at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold of her; howbeit Hera's breast contained not her anger, but she spake to him, saying:
702. Most dread son of Cronos, what a word hast thou said !
703. How art thou minded to render my labour vain and of none effect, and the sweat that I sweated in my toil, — aye, and my horses twain waxed weary with my summoning the host for the bane of Priam and his sons?
704. Do thou as thou wilt; but be sure we other gods assent not all thereto.
705. Then, stirred to hot anger, spake to her Zeus, the cloud - gatherer:
706. Strange queen, wherein do Priam and the sons of Priam work thee ills so many, that thou ragest unceasingly to lay waste the well - built citadel of Ilios?
707. If thou wert to enter within the gates and the high walls, and to devour Priam raw and the sons of Priam and all the Trojans besides, then perchance mightest thou heal thine anger.
708. Do as thy pleasure is; let not this quarrel in time to come be to thee and me a grievous cause of strife between us twain.
709. And another thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to heart.
710. When it shall be that I, vehemently eager to lay waste a city, choose one wherein dwell men that are dear to thee, seek thou in no wise to hinder my anger, but suffer me; since I too have yielded to thee of mine own will, yet with soul unwilling.
711. For of all cities beneath sun and starry heaven wherein men that dwell upon the face of the earth have their abodes, of these sacred Ilios was most honoured of my heart, and Priam and the people of Priam, with goodly spear of ash.
712. For never at any time was mine altar in lack of the equal feast, the drink - offering, and the savour of burnt-offering, even the worship that is our due.
713. Then in answer to him spake ox -eyed, queenly Hera: Verily have I three cities that are far dearest in my sight, Argos and Sparta and broad - wayed Mycenae; these do thou lay waste whensoe'er they shall be hateful to thy heart.
714. Not in their defence do I stand forth, nor account them too greatly.
715. For even though I grudge thee, and am fain to thwart their overthrow, I avail naught by my grudging, for truly thou art far the mightier.
716. Still it beseemeth that my labour too be not made of none effect; for I also am a god, and my birth is from the stock whence is thine own, and crooked - counselling Cronos begat me as the most honoured of his daughters in twofold wise, for that I am eldest, and am called thy wife, whilst thou art king among all the immortals.
717. Nay then, let us yield one to the other herein, I to thee and thou to me, and all the other immortal gods will follow with us; and do thou straightway bid Athene go her way into the dread din of battle of Trojans and Achaeans, and contrive how that the Trojans may be first in defiance of their oaths to work evil upon the Achaeans that exult in their triumph.
718. So said she, and the father of men and gods failed not to hearken; forthwith he spake to Athene winged words:
719. Haste thee with all speed unto the host into the midst of Trojans and Achaeans, and contrive how that the Trojans may be first in defiance of their oaths to work evil upon the Achaeans that exult in their triumph.
720. So saying, he stirred on Athene that was already eager, and down from the peaks of Olympus she went darting.
721. Even in such wise as the son of crooked - counselling Cronos sendeth a star to be a portent for seamen or for a wide host of warriors, a gleaming star, and therefrom the sparks fly thick; even so darted Pallas Athene to earth, and down she leapt into the midst; and amazement came upon all that beheld, on horse - taming Trojans and well - greaved Achaeans; and thus would a man say with a glance at his neighbour:
722. Verily shall we again have evil war and the dread din of battle, or else friendship is set amid the hosts by Zeus, who is for men the dispenser of battle.
723. So would many a one of Achaeans and Trojans speak.
724. But Athene entered the throng of the Trojans in the guise of a man, even of Laodocus, son of Antenor, a valiant spearman, in quest of god-like Pandarus, if haply she might find him.
725. And she found Lycaon's son, peerless and stalwart, as he stood, and about him were the stalwart ranks of the shield - bearing hosts that followed him from the streams of Aesepus.
726. Then she drew near, and spake to him winged words:
727. Wilt thou now hearken to me, thou wise - hearted son of Lycaon?
728. Then wouldst thou dare to let fly a swift arrow upon Menelaus, and wouldst win favour and renown in the eyes of all the Trojans, and of king Alexander most of all.
729. From him of a surety wouldst thou before all others bear off glorious gifts, should he see Menelaus, the warlike son of Atreus, laid low by thy shaft, and set upon the grievous pyre.
730. Nay, come, shoot thine arrow at glorious Menelaus, and vow to Apollo, the wolf - born god, famed for his bow, that thou wilt sacrifice a glorious hecatomb of firstling lambs, when thou shalt come to thy home, the city of sacred Zeleia.
731. So spake Athene, and persuaded his heart in his folly.
732. Straightway he uncovered his polished bow of the horn of a wild ibex, that himself on a time had smitten beneath the breast as it came forth from a rock, he lying in wait the while in a place of ambush, and had struck it in the chest, so that it fell backward in a cleft of the rock.
733. From its head the horns grew to a length of sixteen palms; these the worker in horn had wrought and fitted together, and smoothed all with care, and set thereon a tip of gold.
734. This bow he bent, leaning it against the ground, and laid it carefully down; and his goodly comrades held their shields before him, lest the warrior sons of the Achaeans should leap to their feet or ever Menelaus, the warlike son of Atreus, was smitten.
735. Then opened he the lid of his quiver, and took forth an arrow, a feathered arrow that had never been shot, freighted with dark pains; and forthwith he fitted the bitter arrow to the string, and made a vow to Apollo, the wolf - born god, famed for his bow, that he would sacrifice a glorious hecatomb of firstling lambs, when he should come to his home, the city of sacred Zeleia.
736. And he drew the bow, clutching at once the notched arrow and the string of ox's sinew: the string he brought to his breast and to the bow the iron arrow - head.
737. But when he had drawn the great bow into a round, the bow twanged and the string sang aloud, and the keen arrow leapt, eager to wing its way amid the throng.
738. Then, O Menelaus, the blessed gods, the immortals, forgat thee not; and before all the daughter of Zeus, she that driveth the spoil, who took her stand before thee, and warded off the stinging arrow.
739. She swept it just aside from the flesh, even as a mother sweepeth a fly from her child when he lieth in sweet slumber; and of herself she guided it where the golden clasps of the belt were fastened and the corselet overlapped.
740. On the clasped belt lighted the bitter arrow, and through the belt richly dight was it driven, and clean through the curiously wrought corselet did it force its way, and through the taslet which he wore, a screen for his flesh and a barrier against darts, wherein was his chiefest defence; yet even through this did it speed.
741. So the arrow grazed the outermost flesh of the warrior, and forthwith the dark blood flowed from the wound.
742. As when a woman staineth ivory with scarlet, some woman of Maeonia or Caria, to make a cheek - piece for horses, and it lieth in a treasure - chamber, though many horsemen pray to wear it; but it lieth there as a king's treasure, alike an ornament for his horse and to its driver a glory; even in such wise, Menelaus, were thy thighs stained with blood, thy shapely thighs and thy legs and thy fair ankles beneath.
743. Thereat shuddered the king of men, Agamemnon, as he saw the black blood flowing from the wound, and Menelaus, dear to Ares, himself likewise shuddered.
744. But when he saw that the sinew and the barbs were without the flesh, back again into his breast was his spirit gathered.
745. But with a heavy moan spake among them lord Agamemnon, holding Menelaus by the hand; and his comrades too made moan:
746. Dear brother, it was for thy death, meseems, that I swore this oath with sacrifice, setting thee forth alone before the face of the Achaeans to do battle with the Trojans, seeing the Trojans have thus smitten thee, and trodden under foot the oaths of faith.
747. Yet in no wise is an oath of none effect and the blood of lambs and drink - offerings of unmixed wine and the hand - clasps, wherein we put our trust.
748. For even if for the moment the Olympian vouchsafeth not fulfillment, yet late and at length doth he fulfill them, and with a heavy price do men make atonement, even with their own heads and their wives and their children.
749. For of a surety know I this in heart and soul: the day shall come when sacred Ilios shall be laid low, and Priam, and the people of Priam, with goodly spear of ash; and Zeus, son of Cronos, throned on high, that dwelleth in the heaven, shall himself shake over them all his dark aegis in wrath for this deceit.
750. These things verily shall not fail of fulfillment; yet dread grief for thee shall be mine, O Menelaus, if thou shalt die and fill up thy lot of life.
751. Aye, and as one most despised should I return to thirsty Argos, for straightway will the Achaeans bethink them of their native land, and so should we leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Argive Helen.
752. And thy bones shall the earth rot as thou liest in the land of Troy with thy task unfinished; and thus shall many a one of the overweening Trojans say, as he leapeth upon the barrow of glorious Menelaus: Would that in every matter it may he thus that Agamemnon may fulfill his wrath, even as now he led hither a host of the Achaeans to no purpose, and lo !
753. So shall some man speak in aftertime; in that day let the wide earth gape for me.
754. But fair - haired Menelaus spake and heartened him, saying:
755. Be thou of good cheer, neither affright in any wise the host of the Achaeans.
756. Not in a fatal spot hath the shaft been fixed; ere that my flashing belt stayed it, and the kilt beneath, and the taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned.
757. Then in answer to him spake lord Agamemnon: Would it may be so, dear Menelaus.
758. But the leech shall search the wound and lay thereon simples that shall make thee cease from dark pains.
759. Therewith he spake to Talthybius, the godlike herald: Talthybius, make haste to call hither Machaon, son of Asclepius, the peerless leech, to see warlike Menelaus, son of Atreus, whom some man well skilled in archery hath smitten with an arrow, some Trojan or Lycian, compassing glory for himself but for us sorrow.
760. So spake he, and the herald failed not to hearken, as he heard, but went his way throughout the host of the brazen - coated Achaeans, glancing this way and that for the warrior Machaon; and he marked him as he stood, and round about him were the stalwart ranks of the shield - bearing hosts that followed him from Trica, the pastureland of horses.
761. And he came up to him, and spake winged words, saying:
762. Rouse thee, son of Asclepius; lord Agamemnon calleth thee to see warlike Menelaus, captain of the Achaeans, whom some man, well skilled in archery, hath smitten with an arrow, some Trojan or Lycian, compassing glory for himself but for us sorrow.
763. So spake he, and roused the heart in his breast, and they went their way in the throng throughout the broad host of the Achaeans.
764. And when they were come where was fair - haired Menelaus, wounded, and around him were gathered in a circle all they that were chieftains, the godlike hero came and stood in their midst, and straightway drew forth the arrow from the clasped belt; and as it was drawn forth the sharp barbs were broken backwards.
765. And he loosed the flashing belt and the kilt beneath and the taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned.
766. But when he saw the wound where the bitter arrow had lighted, he sucked out the blood, and with sure knowledge spread thereon soothing simples, which of old Cheiron had given to his father with kindly thought.
767. While they were thus busied with Menelaus, good at the war-cry, meanwhile the ranks of the shield - bearing Trojans came on; and the Achaeans again did on their battle - gear, and bethought them of war.
768. Then wouldst thou not have seen goodly Agamemnon slumbering, nor cowering, nor with no heart for fight, but full eager for battle where men win glory.
769. His horses and his chariot adorned with bronze he let be, and his squire, Eurymedon, son of Peiraeus' son Ptolemaeus, kept the snorting steeds withdrawn apart; and straitly did Agamemnon charge him to have them at hand, whenever weariness should come upon his limbs, as he gave commands throughout all the host; but he himself ranged on foot through the ranks of warriors.
770. And whomsoever of the Danaans with swift steeds he saw eager, to these would he draw nigh, and hearten them earnestly, saying:
771. Ye Argives, relax ye no whit of your furious valour; for father Zeus will be no helper of lies; nay, they that were the first to work violence in defiance of their oaths, their tender flesh of a surety shall vultures devour, and we shall bear away in our ships their dear wives and little children, when we shall have taken their citadel.
772. And whomsoever again he saw holding back from hateful war, them would he chide roundly with angry words:
773. Ye Argives that rage with the bow, ye men of dishonour, have ye no shame?
774. Why is it that ye stand thus dazed, like fawns that, when they have grown weary with running over a wide plain, stand still, and in their hearts is no valour found at all?
775. Even so ye stand dazed and fight not.
776. Is it that ye wait for the Trojans to come near where your ships with stately sterns are drawn up on the shore of the grey sea, that ye may know if haply the son of Cronos will stretch forth his arm over you?
777. Thus ranged he giving his commands through the ranks of warriors; and he came to the Cretans as he fared through the throng of men.
778. These were arming them for war around wise - hearted Idomeneus; and Idomeneus stood amid the foremost fighters like a wild boar in valour, while Meriones was speeding on the hindmost battalions.
779. At sight of them Agamemnon, king of men, waxed glad, and forthwith he spake to Idomeneus with gentle words: Idomeneus, beyond all the Danaans with swift steeds do I show honour to thee both in war and in tasks of other sort, and at the feast, when the chieftains of the Argives let mingle in the bowl the flaming wine of the elders.
780. For even though the other long - haired Achaeans drink an allotted portion, thy cup standeth ever full, even as for mine own self, to drink whensoever thy heart biddeth thee.
781. Come, rouse thee for battle, such a one as of old thou declaredst thyself to be.
782. To him then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, made answer, saying: Son of Atreus, of a surety will I be to thee a trusty comrade, even as at the first I promised and gave my pledge; but do thou urge on the other long - haired Achaeans that we may fight with speed, seeing the Trojans have made of none effect our oaths.
783. Death and woes shall hereafter be their lot, for that they were the first to work violence in defiance of the oaths.
784. So spake he, and the son of Atreus passed on, glad at heart, and came to the Aiantes as he fared through the throng of warriors; these were arming them for battle, and a cloud of footmen followed with them.
785. Even as when from some place of outlook a goatherd seeth a cloud coming over the face of the deep before the blast of the West Wind, and to him being afar off it seemeth blacker than pitch as it passeth over the face of the deep, and it bringeth a mighty whirlwind; and he shuddereth at sight of it, and driveth his flock beneath a cave; even in such wise by the side of the Aiantes did the thick battalions of youths, nurtured of Zeus, move into furious war — dark battalions, bristling with shields and spears.
786. At sight of these lord Agamemnon waxed glad, and he spake and addressed them with winged words:
787. Ye Aiantes, leaders of the brazen - coated Argives, to you twain, for it beseemeth not to urge you, I give no charge; for of yourselves ye verily bid your people fight amain.
788. I would, O father Zeus and Athene and Apollo, that such spirit as yours might be found in the breasts of all; then would the city of king Priam forthwith bow her head, taken and laid waste beneath our hands.
789. So saying, he left them there and went to others.
790. Then found he Nestor, the clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, arraying his comrades and urging them to fight, around mighty Pelagon and Alastor and Chromius and lord Haemon and Bias, shepherd of the host.
791. The charioteers first he arrayed with their horses and cars, and behind them the footmen, many and valiant, to be a bulwark of battle; but the cowards he drave into the midst, that were he never so loath each man must needs fight perforce.
792. Upon the charioteers was he first laying charge, and he bade them keep their horses in hand, nor drive tumultuously on amid the throng.
793. Neither let any man, trusting in his horsemanship and his valour, be eager to fight with the Trojans alone in front of the rest, nor yet let him draw back; for so will ye be the feebler.
794. But what man soe'er from his own car can come at a car of the foe, let him thrust forth with his spear, since verily it is far better so.
795. Thus also did men of olden time lay waste cities and walls, having in their breasts mind and spirit such as this.
796. So was the old man urging them on, having knowledge of battles from of old.
797. At sight of him lord Agamemnon waxed glad, and he spake, and addressed him with winged words: Old Sir, I would that even as is the spirit in thy breast, so thy limbs might obey, and thy strength be firm.
798. But evil old age presseth hard upon thee; would that some other among the warriors had thy years, and that thou wert among the youths.
799. To him then made answer the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia: Son of Atreus, verily I myself could wish that I were such a one as on the day when I slew goodly Ereuthalion.
800. But in no wise do the gods grant to men all things at one time.
801. As I was then a youth, so now doth old age attend me.
802. Yet even so will I abide among the charioteers and urge them on by counsel and by words; for that is the office of elders.
803. Spears shall the young men wield who are more youthful than I and have confidence in their strength.
804. So spake he, and the son of Atreus passed on glad at heart.
805. He found Menestheus, driver of horses, son of Peteos, as he stood, and about him were the Athenians, masters of the war-cry.
806. And hard by stood Odysseus of many wiles, and with him the ranks of the Cephallenians, no weakling folk, stood still; for their host had not as yet heard the war-cry, seeing the battalions of the horse - taming Trojans and the Achaeans had but newly bestirred them to move; wherefore these stood, and waited until some other serried battalions of the Achaeans should advance to set upon the Trojans, and begin the battle.
807. At sight of these Agamemnon, king of men, chid them, and spoke, and addressed them with winged words: O son of Peteos, the king nurtured of Zeus, and thou that excellest in evil wiles, thou of crafty mind, why stand ye apart cowering, and wait for others?
808. For you twain were it seemly that ye take your stand amid the foremost, and confront blazing battle; for ye are the first to hear my bidding to the feast, whenso we Achaeans make ready a banquet for the elders.
809. Then are ye glad to eat roast meat and drink cups of honey - sweet wine as long as ye will.
810. But now would ye gladly behold it, aye if ten serried battalions of the Achaeans were to fight in front of you with the pitiless bronze.
811. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows Odysseus of many wiles addressed him: Son of Atreus, what a word hath escaped the barrier of thy teeth !
812. How sayest thou that we are slack in battle, whenso we Achaeans rouse keen war against the horse - taming Trojans?
813. Thou shalt see, if so be thou wilt and if thou carest aught therefor, the father of Telemachus mingling with the foremost fighters of the horse - taming Trojans.
814. This that thou sayest is as empty wind.
815. Then lord Agamemnon spake to him with a smile, when he knew that he was wroth, and took back his words: Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, neither do I chide thee overmuch nor urge thee on, for I know that the heart in thy breast knoweth kindly thoughts, seeing thou art minded even as I am.
816. Nay, come, these things will we make good hereafter, if any harsh word hath been spoken now; and may the gods make all to come to naught.
817. So saying he left them there and went to others.
818. Then found he the son of Tydeus, Diomedes high of heart, as he stood in his jointed car; and by his side stood Sthenelus, son of Capaneus.
819. At sight of him too lord Agamemnon chid him, and spake and addressed him with winged words:
820. Ah me, thou son of wise - hearted Tydeus, tamer of horses, why cowerest thou, why gazest thou at the dykes of battle?
821. Tydeus of a surety was not wont thus to cower, but far in advance of his comrades to fight against the foe, as they tell who saw him amid the toil of war; for I never met him, neither saw him; but men say that he was pre-eminent over all.
822. Once verily he came to Mycenae, not as an enemy, but as a guest, in company with godlike Polyneices, to gather a host; for in that day they were waging a war against the sacred walls of Thebe, and earnestly did they make prayer that glorious allies be granted them; and the men of Mycenae were minded to grant them, and were assenting even as they bade, but Zeus turned their minds by showing tokens of ill.
823. So when they had departed and were with deep reeds, that coucheth in the grass, there did the Achaeans send forth Tydeus on an embassage.
824. And he went his way, and found the many sons of Cadmus feasting in the house of mighty Eteocles.
825. Then, for all he was a stranger, the horseman Tydeus feared not, all alone though he was amid the many Cadmeians, but challenged them all to feats of strength and in every one vanquished he them full easily; such a helper was Athene to him.
826. But the Cadmeians, goaders of horses, waxed wroth, and as he journeyed back, brought and set a strong ambush, even fifty youths, and two there were as leaders, Maeon, son of Haemon, peer of the immortals, and Autophonus' son, Polyphontes, staunch in fight.
827. But Tydeus even upon these let loose a shameful fate, and slew them all; one only man suffered he to return home;
828. Maeon he sent forth in obedience to the portents of the gods.
829. Such a man was Tydeus of Aetolia; howbeit the son that he begat is worse than he in battle, though in the place of gathering he is better.
830. So he spake, and stalwart Diomedes answered him not a word, but had respect to the reproof of the king revered.
831. But the son of glorious Capaneus made answer.
832. Son of Atreus, utter not lies, when thou knowest how to speak truly.
833. We declare ourselves to be better men by far than our fathers: we took the seat of Thebe of the seven gates, when we twain had gathered a lesser host against a stronger wall, putting our trust in the portents of the gods and in the aid of Zeus; whereas they perished through their own blind folly.
834. Wherefore I bid thee put not our fathers in like honour with us.
835. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows stalwart Diomedes addressed him: Good friend, abide in silence, and hearken to my word.
836. I count it not shame that Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, should urge on to battle the well - greaved Achaeans; for upon him will great glory attend if the Achaeans shall slay the Trojans and take sacred Ilios, and upon him likewise will fall great sorrow, if the Achaeans be slain.
837. Nay, come, let us twain also bethink us of furious valour.
838. He spake, and leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground, and terribly rang the bronze upon the breast of the prince as he moved; thereat might terror have seized even one that was steadfast of heart.
839. As when on a sounding beach the swell of the sea beats, wave after wave, before the driving of the West Wind; out on the deep at the first is it gathered in a crest, but thereafter is broken upon the land and thundereth aloud, and round about the headlands it swelleth and reareth its head, and speweth forth the salt brine: even in such wise on that day did the battalions of the Danaans move, rank after rank, without cease, into battle; and each captain gave charge to his own men, and the rest marched on in silence; thou wouldst not have deemed that they that followed in such multitudes had any voice in their breasts, all silent as they were through fear of their commanders; and on every man flashed the inlaid armour wherewith they went clad.
840. But for the Trojans, even as ewes stand in throngs past counting in the court of a man of much substance to be milked of their white milk, and bleat without ceasing as they near the voices of their lambs: even so arose the clamour of the Trojans throughout the wide host; for they had not all like speech or one language, but their tongues were mingled, and they were a folk summoned from many lands.
841. These were urged on by Ares, and the Greeks by flashing - eyed Athene, and Terror, and Rout, and Discord that rageth incessantly, sister and comrade of man-slaying Ares; she at the first rears her crest but little, yet thereafter planteth her head in heaven, while her feet tread on earth.
842. She it was that now cast evil strife into their midst as she fared through the throng, making the groanings of men to wax.
843. Now when they were met together and come into one place, then dashed they together shields and spears and the fury of bronze - mailed warriors; and the bossed shields closed each with each, and a great din arose.
844. Then were heard alike the sound of groaning and the cry of triumph of the slayers and the slain, and the earth flowed with blood.
845. As when winter torrents, flowing down the mountains from their great springs to a place where two valleys meet, join their mighty floods in a deep gorge, and far off amid the mountains the shepherd heareth the thunder thereof; even so from the joining of these in battle came shouting and toil.
846. Antilochus was first to slay a warrior of the Trojans in full armour, a goodly man amid the foremost fighters, Echepolus, son of Thalysius.
847. Him was he first to smite upon the horn of his helmet with crest of horse - hair, and into his forehead drave the spear, and the point of bronze passed within the bone; and darkness enfolded his eyes, and he crashed as doth a wall, in the mighty conflict.
848. As he fell lord Elephenor caught him by the feet, the son he of Chalcodon, and captain of the great-souled Abantes, and sought to drag him from beneath the missiles, fain with all speed to strip off his armour; yet but for a scant space did his striving endure; for as he was haling the corpse great-souled Agenor caught sight of him, and where his side was left uncovered of his shield, as he stooped, even there; he smote him with a thrust of his bronze - shod spear, and loosed his limbs.
849. So his spirit left him, and over his body was wrought grievous toil of Trojans and Achaeans.
850. Even as wolves leapt they one upon the other, and man made man to reel.
851. Then Telamonian Aias smote Anthemion's son, the lusty youth Simoeisius, whom on a time his mother had born beside the banks of Simois, as she journeyed down from Ida, whither she had followed with her parents to see their flocks.
852. For this cause they called him Simoeisius; yet paid he not back to his dear parents the recompense of his upbringing, and but brief was the span of his life, for that he was laid low by the spear of great-souled Aias.
853. For, as he strode amid the foremost, he was smitten on the right breast beside the nipple; and clean through his shoulder went the spear of bronze, and he fell to the ground in the dust like a poplar tree that hath grown up in the bottom land of a great marsh, smooth of stem, but from the top thereof branches grow: this hath some wainwright felled with the gleaming iron that he might bend him a felloe for a beauteous chariot, and it lieth drying by a river's banks.
854. Even in such wise did Zeus-born Aias slay Simoeisius, son of Anthemion.
855. And at him Priam's son Antiphus, of the flashing corselet, cast with his sharp spear amid the throng.
856. Him he missed, but smote in the groin Odysseus' goodly comrade, Leucus, as he was drawing the corpse to the other side; so he fell upon it, and the body slipped from his grasp.
857. For his slaying waxed Odysseus mightily wroth at heart, and strode amid the foremost warriors, harnessed in flaming bronze; close to the foe he came and took his stand, and glancing warily about him hurled with his bright spear; and back did the Trojans shrink from the warrior as he cast.
858. Not in vain did he let fly his spear, but smote Priam's bastard son Democoon, that had come at his call from Abydus, from his stud of swift mares.
859. Him Odysseus, wroth for his comrade's sake, smote with his spear on the temple, and out through the other temple passed the spear-point of bronze, and darkness enfolded his eyes, and he fell with a thud and upon him his armour clanged.
860. Then the foremost warriors and glorious Hector gave ground; and the Argives shouted aloud, and drew off the bodies, and charged far further onward.
861. And Apollo, looking down from Pergamus, had indignation, and called with a shout to the Trojans: Rouse ye, horse - taming Trojans, give not ground in fight before Argives; not of stone nor of iron is their flesh to resist the bronze that cleaveth the flesh, when they are smitten.
862. Nay, and Achilles moreover fighteth not, the son of fair - haired Thetis, but amid the ships nurseth his bitter wrath.
863. So spake the dread god from the city; but the Achaeans were urged on by the daughter of Zeus, most glorious Tritogeneia, who fared throughout the throng wheresoever she saw them giving ground.
864. Then was Amarynceus' son, Diores, caught in the snare of fate; for with a jagged stone was he smitten on the right leg by the ankle, and it was the leader of the Thracians that made the cast, even Peiros, son of Imbrasus, that had come from Aenus.
865. The sinews twain and the bones did the ruthless stone utterly crush; and he fell backward in the dust and stretched out both his hands to his dear comrades, gasping out his life; and there ran up he that smote him, Peiros, and dealt him a wound with a thrust of his spear beside the navel; and forth upon the ground gushed all his bowels, and darkness enfolded his eyes.
866. But as the other sprang back Thoas of Aetolia smote him with a cast of his spear in the breast above the nipple, and the bronze was fixed in his lung; and Thoas came close to him, and plucked forth from his chest the mighty spear, and drew his sharp sword and smote him therewith full upon the belly, and took away his life.
867. Howbeit of his armour he stripped him not, for about him his comrades, men of Thrace that wear the hair long at the top, stood with long spears grasped in their hands, and for all that he was great and mighty and lordly, drave him back from them, so that he reeled and gave ground.
868. Thus the twain lay stretched in the dust each by the other, captains the one of the Thracians and the other of the brazen - coated Epeians; and about them were others full many likewise slain.
869. Then could no man any more enter into the battle and make light thereof, whoso still unwounded by missile or by thrust of sharp bronze, might move throughout the midst, being led of Pallas Athene by the hand, and by her guarded from the onrush of missiles: for multitudes of Trojans and Achaeans alike were that day stretched one by the other's side with faces in the dust.
870. And now to Tydeus' son, Diomedes, Pallas Athene gave might and courage, that he should prove himself pre-eminent amid all the Argives, and win glorious renown.
871. She kindled from his helm and shield flame unwearying, like to the star of harvesttime that shineth bright above all others when he hath bathed him in the stream of Ocean.
872. Even such flame did she kindle from his head and shoulders; and she sent him into the midst where men thronged the thickest.
873. Now there was amid the Trojans one Dares, a rich man and blameless, a priest of Hephaestus; and he had two sons, Phegeus and Idaeus, both well skilled in all manner of fighting.
874. These twain separated themselves from the host and went forth against Diomedes, they in their car, while he charged on foot upon the ground.
875. And when they were come near, as they advanced against each other, first Phegeus let fly his far-shadowing spear; and over the left shoulder of the son of Tydeus passed the point of the spear, and smote him not.
876. Then Tydeus' son rushed on with the bronze, and not in vain did the shaft speed from his hand, but he smote his foe on the breast between the nipples, and thrust him from the car.
877. And Idaeus sprang back, and left the beauteous chariot, and had no heart to bestride his slain brother.
878. Nay, nor would he himself have escaped black fate, had not Hephaestus guarded him, and saved him, enfolding him in darkness, that his aged priest might not be utterly fordone with grief.
879. Howbeit the horses did the son of great souled Tydeus drive forth and give to his comrades to bring to the hollow ships.
880. But when the great-souled Trojans beheld the two sons of Dares, the one in flight and the other slain beside the car, the hearts of all were dismayed.
881. And flashing - eyed Athene took furious Ares by the hand and spake to him, saying: Ares, Ares, thou bane of mortals, thou blood - stained stormer of walls, shall we not now leave the Trojans and Achaeans to fight, to whichsoever of the two it be that father Zeus shall vouchsafe glory?
882. But for us twain, let us give place, and avoid the wrath of Zeus.
883. So spake she, and led furious Ares forth from the battle.
884. Then she made him to sit down on the sandy banks of Scamander, and the Trojans were turned in flight by the Danaans.
885. Each one of the captains slew his man; first the king of men, Agamemnon, thrust from his car the leader of the Halizones, great Odius, for as he turned first of all to flee he fixed his spear in his back between the shoulders and drave it through his breast; and he fell with a thud, and upon him his armour clanged.
886. And Idomeneus slew Phaestus, son of Borus the Maeonian, that had come from deep -soiled Tarne.
887. Him even as he was mounting his chariot Idomeneus, famed for his spear, pierced with a thrust of his long spear through the right shoulder; and he fell from his car, and hateful darkness gat hold of him.
888. Him then the squires of Idomeneus stripped of his armour; and Scamandrius, son of Strophius, cunning in the chase, did Atreus' son Menelaus slay with his sharp spear, even him the mighty hunter; for Artemis herself had taught him to smite all wild things that the mountain forest nurtureth.
889. Yet in no wise did the archer Artemis avail him now, neither all that skill in archery wherein of old he excelled; but the son of Atreus, Menelaus famed for his spear, smote him as he fled before him with a thrust of his spear in the back between the shoulders, and drave it through his breast.
890. So he fell face foremost, and upon him his armour clanged.
891. And Meriones slew Phereclus, son of Tecton, Harmon's son, whose hands were skilled to fashion all manner of curious work; for Pallas Athene loved him above all men.
892. He it was that had also built for Alexander the shapely ships, source of ills, that were made the bane of all the Trojans and of his own self, seeing he knew not in any wise the oracles of the gods.
893. After him Meriones pursued, and when he had come up with him, smote him in the right buttock, and the spear-point passed clean through even to the bladder beneath the bone;, and he fell to his knees with a groan, and death enfolded him.
894. And Pedaeus, Antenor's son, was slain of Meges; he was in truth a bastard, howbeit goodly Theano had reared him carefully even as her own children, to do pleasure to her husband.
895. To him Phyleus' son, famed for his spear, drew nigh and smote him with a cast of his sharp spear on the sinew of the head; and straight through amid the teeth the bronze shore away the tongue at its base.
896. So he fell in the dust, and bit the cold bronze with his teeth.
897. And Eurypylus, son of Euaemon, slew goodly Hypsenor, son of Dolopion high of heart, that was made priest of Scamander, and was honoured of the folk even as a god — upon him did Eurypylus, Euaemon's glorious son, rush with his sword as he fled before him, and in mid-course smite him upon the shoulder and lop off his heavy arm.
898. So the arm all bloody fell to the ground; and down over his eyes came dark death and mighty fate.
899. Thus toiled they in the mighty conflict; but of Tydeus' son couldst thou not have told with which host of the twain he was joined, whether it was with the Trojans that he had fellowship or with the Achaeans.
900. For he stormed across the plain like unto a winter torrent at the full, that with its swift flood sweeps away the embankments; this the close - fenced embankments hold not back, neither do the walls of the fruitful vineyards stay its sudden coming when the rain of Zeus driveth it on; and before it in multitudes the fair works of men fall in ruin.
901. Even in such wise before Tydeus' son were the thick battalions of the Trojans driven in rout, nor might they abide him for all they were so many.
902. But when the glorious son of Lycaon was ware of him as he raged across the plain and drove the battalions in rout before him, forthwith he bent against the son of Tydeus his curved bow, and with sure aim smote him as he rushed onwards upon the right shoulder on the plate of his corselet; through this sped the bitter arrow and held straight on its way, and the corselet was spattered with blood.
903. Over him then shouted aloud the glorious son of Lycaon:
904. Rouse you, great - souled Trojans, ye goaders of horses.
905. Smitten is the best man of the Achaeans, and I deem he will not for long endure the mighty shaft, if in very truth the king, the son of Zeus, sped me on my way when I set forth from Lycia.
906. So spake he vauntingly; howbeit that other did the swift arrow not lay low, but he drew back, and took his stand before his horses and chariot, and spake to Sthenelus, son of Capaneus:
907. Rouse thee, good son of Capaneus; get thee down from the car, that thou mayest draw forth from my shoulder the bitter arrow.
908. So spake he, and Sthenelus leapt from his chariot to the ground, and stood beside him, and drew forth the swift arrow clean through his shoulder; and the blood spurted up through the pliant tunic.
909. And thereat Diomedes, good at the war-cry, made prayer: Hear me, child of Zeus that beareth the aegis, unwearied one !
910. If ever with kindly thought thou stoodest by my father's side amid the fury of battle, even so do thou now be likewise kind to me, Athene.
911. Grant that I may slay this man, and that he come within the cast of my spear, that hath smitten me or ever I was ware of him, and boasteth over me, and declareth that not for long shall I behold the bright light of the sun.
912. So spake he in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, and made his limbs light, his feet and his hands above; and she drew near to his side and spake to him winged words:
913. Be of good courage now, Diomedes, to fight against the Trojans, for in thy breast have I put the might of thy father, the dauntless might, such as the horseman Tydeus, wielder of the shield, was wont to have.
914. And the mist moreover have I taken from thine eyes that afore was upon them, to the end that thou mayest well discern both god and man.
915. Wherefore now if any god come hither to make trial of thee, do not thou in any wise fight face to face with any other immortal gods, save only if Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus, shall enter the battle, her do thou smite with a thrust of the sharp bronze.
916. When she had thus spoken, the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, departed, and the son of Tydeus returned again and mingled with the foremost fighters; and though afore his heart had been eager to do battle with the Trojans, now verily did fury thrice so great lay hold upon him, even as upon a lion that a shepherd in the field, guarding his fleecy sheep, hath wounded as he leapt over the wall of the sheep - fold, but hath not vanquished; his might hath he roused, but thereafter maketh no more defence, but slinketh amid the farm buildings, and the flock all unprotected is driven in rout, and the sheep are strewn in heaps, each hard by each, but the lion in his fury leapeth forth from the high fold; even in such fury did mighty Diomedes mingle with the Trojans.
917. Then slew he Astynous and Hypeiron, shepherd of the host; the one he smote above the nipple with a cast of his bronze - shod spear, and the other he struck with his great sword upon the collar - bone beside the shoulder, and shore off the shoulder from the neck and from the back.
918. These then he let be, but went his way in pursuit of Abas and Polyidus, sons of the old man Eurydamas, the reader of dreams; howbeit they came not back for the old man to interpret dreams for them, but mighty Diomedes slew them.
919. Then went he on after Xanthus and Thoön, sons twain of Phaenops, and both well beloved; and their father was fordone with grievous old age, and begat no other son to leave in charge of his possessions.
920. There Diomedes slew them, and bereft them of dear life, both the twain; but for the father he left lamentation and grievous sorrow, seeing they lived not for him to welcome them on their return; and the next of kin divided his goods.
921. Then took he two sons of Priam, Dardanus' son, Echemmon and Chromius, the twain being in one car.
922. Even as a lion leapeth among the kine and breaketh the neck of a heifer or a cow as they graze in a woodland pasture, so did Tydeus' son thrust both these in evil wise from their car, sorely against their will, and thereafter despoiled them of their armour; and the horses he gave to his comrades to drive to the ships.
923. But Aeneas was ware of him as he made havoc of the ranks of warriors, and went his way along the battle amid the hurtling of the spears in quest of godlike Pandarus, if so be he might anywhere find him.
924. He found the son of Lycaon, goodly and valiant, and took his stand before his face, and spake to him, saying: Pandarus, where now are thy bow and thy winged arrows, and thy fame?
925. Therein may no man of this land vie with thee, nor any in Lycia declare himself to be better than thou.
926. Come now, lift up thy hands in prayer to Zeus, and let fly a shaft at this man, whoe'er he be that prevaileth thus, and hath verily wrought the Trojans much mischief, seeing he hath loosed the knees of many men and goodly; if indeed he be not some god that is wroth with the Trojans, angered by reason of sacrifices; with grievous weight doth the wrath of god rest upon men.
927. To him then spake the glorious son of Lycaon: Aeneas, counsellor of the brazen - coated Trojans, to the wise - hearted son of Tydeus do I liken him in all things, knowing him by his shield and his crested helm, and when I look on his horses; yet I know not surely if he be not a god.
928. But if he be the man I deem him, even the wise - hearted son of Tydeus, not without the aid of some god doth he thus rage, but one of the immortals standeth hard by him, his shoulders wrapped in cloud, and turned aside from him my swift shaft even as it lighted.
929. For already have I let fly a shaft at him, and I smote him upon the right shoulder clean through the plate of his corselet; and I deemed that I should send him forth to Aïdoneus, yet I subdued him not; verily he is some wrathful god.
930. And horses have I not at hand, neither car whereon I might mount — yet in Lycaon's halls, I ween, there be eleven fair chariots, new-wrought, new-furnished, with cloths spread over them; and by each standeth its yoke of horses feeding on white barley and spelt.
931. Aye, and as I set out hither the old spearman Lycaon straitly charged me in our well - built house: he bade me be mounted on horse and car, and so lead the Trojans in mighty conflicts.
932. Howbeit I hearkened not — verily it had been better far ! — but spared the horses lest in the multitude of men they should lack fodder, they that were wont to eat their fill.
933. So I left them, and am come on foot to Ilios, trusting in my bow; but this, meseems, was to avail me not.
934. Already have I let fly a shaft at two chieftains, the son of Tydeus and Atreus' son, and smitten them fairly, and from them both of a surety I drew forth blood, yet did I but arouse them the more.
935. Wherefore with ill hap was it that I took from the peg my curved bow on that day when I led my Trojans to lovely Ilios to do pleasure to Hector.
936. But if so be I shall return and behold with mine eyes my native land and my wife and great, high - roofed palace, then may some alien forthwith cut my head from me, if I break not this bow with my hands and cast it into the blazing fire; for worthless as wind doth it attend me.
937. To him then spake in answer Aeneas, leader of the Trojans: Nay, speak not thus; things shall in no wise be any better before that we twain with horses and chariot go to face this man and make trial of him in arms.
938. Nay, come, mount upon my car, that thou mayest see of what sort are the horses of Tros, well skilled to course fleetly hither and thither over the plain whether in pursuit or in flight.
939. They twain will bring the two of us safely to the city, if again Zeus shall vouchsafe glory to Tydeus' son Diomedes.
940. Come, therefore, take thou now the lash and the shining reins, and I will dismount to fight; or else do thou await his onset, and I will look to the horses.
941. Then made answer to him the glorious son of Lycaon: Aeneas, keep thou the reins thyself, and drive thine own horses; better will they draw the curved car under their wonted charioteer, if so be we must flee from the son of Tydeus.
942. I would not that they take fright and run wild, and for want of thy voice be not minded to bear us forth from the battle, and so the son of great-souled Tydeus leap upon us and slay the two of us, and drive off the single - hooved horses.
943. Nay, drive thou thyself thine own car and thine own horses, and I will abide this man's onset with my sharp spear.
944. So saying they mounted upon the inlaid car and eagerly drave the swift horses against the son of Tydeus.
945. And Sthenelus, the glorious son of Capaneus, saw them and straightway spake to Tydeus' son winged words: Diomedes, son of Tydeus, dear to my heart, I behold two valiant warriors eager to fight against thee, endued with measureless strength.
946. The one is well skilled with the bow, even Pandarus, and moreover avoweth him to be the son of Lycaon; while Aeneas avoweth himself to be born of peerless Anchises, and his mother is Aphrodite.
947. Nay, come, let us give ground on the car, neither rage thou thus, I pray thee, amid the foremost fighters, lest thou haply lose thy life.
948. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows mighty Diomedes spake to him:
949. Talk not thou to me of flight, for I deem thou wilt not persuade me.
950. Not in my blood is it to fight a skulking fight or to cower down; still is my strength steadfast.
951. And I have no mind to mount upon a car, but even as I am will I go to face them; that I should quail Pallas Athene suffereth not.
952. As for these twain, their swift horses shall not bear both back from us again, even if one or the other escape.
953. And another thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to heart.
954. If so be Athene, rich in counsel, shall vouchsafe me this glory, to slay them both, then do thou hold here these swift horses, binding the reins taut to the chariot rim; but be mindful to rush upon the horses of Aeneas and drive them forth from the Trojans to the host of the well - greaved Achaeans.
955. For they are of that stock wherefrom Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, gave to Tros recompense for his son Ganymedes, for that they were the best of all horses that are beneath the dawn and the sun.
956. Of this stock the king of men Anchises stole a breed, putting his mares to them while Laomedon knew naught thereof.
957. And from these a stock of six was born him in his palace; four he kept himself and reared at the stall, and the other two he gave to Aeneas, devisers of rout.
958. Could we but take these twain, we should win us goodly renown.
959. Thus they spake on this wise one to the other, and forthwith drew near those other twain, driving the swift horses.
960. And Lycaon's glorious son spake first to him, saying:
961. Thou son of lordly Tydeus, stalwart and wise of heart, verily my swift shaft subdued thee not, the bitter arrow; now will I again make trial of thee with my spear, if so be I may hit thee.
962. So saying, he poised and hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon the shield of Tydeus' son; and straight therethrough sped the point of bronze and reached the corselet.
963. Then over him shouted aloud the glorious son of Lycaon:
964. Thou art smitten clean through the belly, and not for long, methinks, shalt thou endure; but to me hast thou granted great glory.
965. Then with no touch of fear spake to him mighty Diomedes:
966. Thou hast missed and not hit; but ye twain, I deem, shall not cease till one or the other of you shall have fallen and glutted with his blood Ares, the warrior with tough shield of hide.
967. So spake he and hurled; and Athene guided the spear upon his nose beside the eye, and it pierced through his white teeth.
968. So the stubborn bronze shore off his tongue at its root, and the spear-point came out by the base of the chin.
969. Then he fell from out the car, and his armour all bright and flashing clanged upon him, and the swift - footed horses swerved aside; and there his spirit and his strength were undone.
970. But Aeneas leapt down with shield and long spear, seized with fear lest perchance the Achaeans might drag from him the dead man.
971. Over him he strode like a lion confident in his strength, and before him he held his spear and his shield that was well balanced on every side, eager to slay the man whosoever should come to seize the corpse, and crying a terrible cry.
972. But the son of Tydeus grasped in his hand a stone — a mighty deed — one that not two men could bear, such as mortals now are; yet lightly did he wield it even alone.
973. Therewith he smote Aeneas on the hip, where the thigh turns in the hip joint, — the cup, men call it — and crushed the cup-bone, and broke furthermore both sinews, and the jagged stone tore the skin away.
974. Then the warrior fell upon his knees, and thus abode, and with his stout hand leaned he upon the earth; and dark night enfolded his eyes.
975. And now would the king of men, Aeneas, have perished, had not the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, been quick to mark, even his mother, that conceived him to Anchises as he tended his kine.
976. About her dear son she flung her white arms, and before him she spread a fold of her bright garment to be a shelter against missiles, lest any of the Danaans with swift horses might hurl a spear of bronze into his breast and take away his life.
977. She then was bearing her dear son forth from out the battle; but the son of Capaneus forgat not the commands that Diomedes good at the war-cry laid upon him.
978. He held his own single - hooved horses away from the turmoil, binding the reins taut to the chariot rim, but rushed upon the fair - maned horses of Aeneas, and drave them forth from the Trojans into the host of the well - greaved Achaeans, and gave them to Deïpylus his dear comrade, whom he honoured above all the companions of his youth, because he was like - minded with himself; him he bade drive them to the hollow ships.
979. Then did the warrior mount his own car and take the bright reins, and straightway drive his stout - hooved horses in eager quest of Tydeus' son.
980. He the while had gone in pursuit of Cypris with his pitiless bronze, discerning that she was a weakling goddess, and not one of those that lord it in the battle of warriors, — no Athene she, nor Enyo, sacker of cities.
981. But when he had come upon her as he pursued her through the great throng, then the son of great-souled Tydeus thrust with his sharp spear and leapt upon her, and wounded the surface of her delicate hand, and forthwith through the ambrosial raiment that the Graces themselves had wrought for her the spear pierced the flesh upon the wrist above the palm and forth flowed the immortal blood of the goddess, the ichor, such as floweth in the blessed gods; for they eat not bread neither drink flaming wine, wherefore they are bloodless, and are called immortals.
982. She then with a loud cry let fall her son, and Phoebus Apollo took him in his arms and saved him in a dark cloud, lest any of the Danaans with swift horses might hurl a spear of bronze into his breast and take away his life.
983. But over her shouted aloud Diomedes good at the war -cry:
984. Keep thee away, daughter of Zeus, from war and fighting.
985. Sufficeth it not that thou beguilest weakling women?
986. But if into battle thou wilt enter, verily methinks thou shalt shudder at the name thereof, if thou hearest it even from afar.
987. So spake he, and she departed frantic, and was sore distressed; and wind - footed Iris took her and led her forth from out the throng, racked with pain, and her fair flesh was darkened.
988. Anon she found furious Ares abiding on the left of the battle, and upon a cloud was his spear leaning, and at hand were his swift horses twain.
989. Then she fell upon her knees and with instant prayer begged for her dear brother's horses with frontlets of gold:
990. Dear brother, save me, and give me thy horses, that I may get me to Olympus, where is the abode of the immortals.
991. For sorely am I pained with a wound which a mortal man dealt me, Tydeus' son, that would now fight even with father Zeus.
992. So spake she, and Ares gave her his horses with frontlets of gold; and she mounted upon the car, her heart distraught, and beside her mounted Iris and took the reins in her hand.
993. She touched the horses with the lash to start them, and nothing loath the pair sped onward.
994. Straightway then they came to the abode of the gods, to steep Olympus and there wind - footed, swift Iris stayed the horses and loosed them from the car, and cast before them food ambrosial; but fair Aphrodite flung herself upon the knees of her mother Dione.
995. She clasped her daughter in her arms, and stroked her with her hand and spake to her, saying:
996. Who now of the sons of heaven, dear child, hath entreated thee thus wantonly, as though thou wert working some evil before the face of all?
997. To her then made answer laughter - loving Aphrodite: Tydeus' son, Diomedes high of heart, wounded me, for that I was bearing forth from out the war my dear son Aeneas, who is in my eyes far the dearest of all men.
998. For no longer is the dread battle one between Trojans and Achaeans; nay, the Danaans now fight even with the immortals.
999. To her then made answer Dione, the fair goddess:
1000. Be of good heart, my child, and endure for all thy suffering; for full many of us that have dwellings on Olympus have suffered at the hands of men, in bringing grievous woes one upon the other.
1001. So suffered Ares, when Otus and mighty Ephialtes, the sons of Aloeus, bound him in cruel bonds, and in a brazen jar he lay bound for thirteen months; and then would Ares, insatiate of war, have perished, had not the stepmother of the sons of Aloeus, the beauteous Eëriboea, brought tidings unto Hermes; and he stole forth Ares, that was now sore distressed, for his grievous bonds were overpowering him.
1002. So suffered Hera, when the mighty son of Amphitryon smote her on the right breast with a three - barbed arrow; then upon her too came pain that might in no wise be assuaged.
1003. And so suffered monstrous Hades even as the rest a bitter arrow, when this same man, the son of Zeus that beareth the aegis, smote him in Pylos amid the dead, and gave him over to pains.
1004. But he went to the house of Zeus and to high Olympus with grief at heart, pierced through with pains; for into his mighty shoulder had the shaft been driven, and distressed his soul.
1005. But Paeëon spread thereon simples that slay pain, and healed him; for verily he was in no wise of mortal mould.
1006. Rash man, worker of violence, that recked not of his evil deeds, seeing that with his arrows he vexed the gods that hold Olympus.
1007. And upon thee has the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, set this man — fool that he is; for the heart of Tydeus' son knoweth not this, that verily he endureth not for long who fighteth with the immortals, nor do his children prattle about his knees when he is come back from war and the dread conflict.
1008. Wherefore now let Tydeus' son, for all he is so mighty, beware lest one better than thou fight against him, lest in sooth Aegialeia, the daughter of Adrastus, passing wise, wake from sleep with her long lamentings all her household, as she wails for her wedded husband, the best man of the Achaeans, even she, the stately wife of horse - taming Diomedes.
1009. She spake, and with both her hands wiped the ichor from the arm; the arm was restored, and the grievous pains assuaged.
1010. But Athene and Hera, as they looked upon her, sought to anger Zeus, son of Cronos, with mocking words.
1011. And among them the goddess flashing - eyed Athene was first to speak: Father Zeus, wilt thou anywise be wroth with me for the word that I shall say?
1012. Of a surety now Cypris has been urging some one of the women of Achaea to follow after the Trojans, whom now she so wondrously loveth; and while stroking such a one of the fair - robed women of Achaea, she hath scratched upon her golden brooch her delicate hand.
1013. So spake she, but the father of men and gods smiled, and calling to him golden Aphrodite, said:
1014. Not unto thee, my child, are given works of war; nay, follow thou after the lovely works of marriage, and all these things shall be the business of swift Ares and Athene.
1015. On this wise spake they one to the other; but Diomedes, good at the war-cry, leapt upon Aeneas, though well he knew that Apollo himself held forth his arms above him; yet had he no awe even of the great god, but was still eager to slay Aeneas and strip from him his glorious armour.
1016. Thrice then he leapt upon him, furiously fain to slay him, and thrice did Apollo beat back his shining shield.
1017. But when for the fourth time he rushed upon him like a god, then with a terrible cry spake to him Apollo that worketh afar:
1018. Bethink thee, son of Tydeus, and give place, neither be thou minded to be like of spirit with the gods; seeing in no wise of like sort is the race of immortal gods and that of men who walk upon the earth.
1019. So spake he, and the son of Tydeus gave ground a scant space backward, avoiding the wrath of Apollo that smiteth afar.
1020. Aeneas then did Apollo set apart from the throng in sacred Pergamus where was his temple builded.
1021. There Leto and the archer Artemis healed him in the great sanctuary, and glorified him; but Apollo of the silver bow fashioned a wraith in the likeness of Aeneas' self and in armour like to his; and over the wraith the Trojans and goodly Achaeans smote the bull's - hide bucklers about one another's breasts, the round shields and fluttering targets.
1022. Then unto furious Ares spake Phoebus Apollo: Ares, Ares, thou bane of mortals, thou blood - stained stormer of walls, wilt thou not now enter into the battle and withdraw this man therefrom, this son of Tydeus, who now would fight even against father Zeus?
1023. Cypris first hath he wounded in close fight on the hand at the wrist, and thereafter rushed he upon mine own self like unto a god.
1024. So spake he, and himself sate him down upon the height of Pergamus, and baneful Ares entered amid the Trojans' ranks and urged them on, in the likeness of swft Acamas, leader of the Thracians.
1025. To Priam's sons, nurtured of Zeus, he called, saying:
1026. Ye sons of Priam, the king nurtured of Zeus, how long will ye still suffer your host to be slain by the Achaeans?
1027. Shall it be until such time as they fight about our well - built gates?
1028. Low lieth a man whom we honoured even as goodly Hector, Aeneas, son of great - hearted Anchises.
1029. Nay, come, let us save from out the din of conflict our noble comrade.
1030. So saying he aroused the strength and spirit of every man.
1031. And Sarpedon moreover sternly chid goodly Hector, saying: Hector, where now is the strength gone that aforetime thou hadst?
1032. Thou saidst forsooth that without hosts and allies thou wouldst hold the city alone with the aid of thy sisters' husbands and thy brothers; howbeit of these can I now neither behold nor mark anyone, but they cower as dogs about a lion; and it is we that fight, we that are but allies among you.
1033. For I that am but an ally am come from very far; afar is Lycia by eddying Xanthus, where I left my dear wife and infant son, and my great wealth the which every man that is in lack coveteth.
1034. Yet even so urge I on the Lycians, and am fain myself to fight my man, though here is naught of mine such as the Achaeans might bear away or drive; whereas thou standest and dost not even urge thy hosts to abide and defend their wives.
1035. Beware lest thou and they, as if caught in the meshes of all - ensnaring flax, become a prey and spoil unto your foemen; and they shall anon lay waste your well - peopled city.
1036. On thee should all these cares rest by night and day, and thou shouldest beseech the captains of thy far- famed allies to hold their ground unflinchingly, and so put away from thee strong rebukings.
1037. So spake Sarpedon, and his word stung Hector to the heart.
1038. Forthwith he leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground, and brandishing his two sharp spears went everywhere throughout the host, urging men to fight, and roused the dread din of battle.
1039. So they rallied and took their stand with their faces towards the Achaeans; and the Argives in close throng abode their coming and fled not.
1040. And even as the wind carrieth chaff about the sacred threshing - floors of men that are winnowing, when fair - haired Demeter amid the driving blasts of wind separates the grain from the chaff, and the heaps of chaff grow white; even so now did the Achaeans grow white over head and shoulders beneath the cloud of dust that through the midst of the warriors the hooves of their horses beat up to the brazen heaven, as the fight was joined again; and the charioteers wheeled round.
1041. The might of their hands they bare straight forward, and about the battle furious Ares drew a veil of night to aid the Trojans, ranging everywhere; so fulfilled he the behest of Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, who bade him rouse the spirit of the Trojans, whenso he saw that Pallas Athene was departed; for she it was that bare aid to the Danaans.
1042. And Apollo himself sent Aeneas forth from out the rich sanctuary, and put courage in the breast of the shepherd of the host.
1043. And Aeneas took his place in the midst of his comrades, and these waxed glad as they saw him come to join them alive and whole and possessed of valiant courage.
1044. Howbeit they questioned him not at all, for toil of other sort forbade them, even that which he of the silver bow was stirring, and Ares the bane of mortals, and Discord that rageth without ceasing.
1045. On the other side the Aiantes twain and Odysseus and Diomedes roused the Danaans to fight; yet these even of themselves quailed not before the Trojans' violence and their onsets, but stood their ground like mists that in still weather the son of Cronos setteth on the mountain - tops moveless, what time the might of the North Wind sleepeth and of the other furious winds that blow with shrill blasts and scatter this way and that the shadowy clouds; even so the Danaans withstood the Trojans steadfastly, and fled not.
1046. And the son of Atreus ranged throughout the throng with many a word of command:
1047. My friends, be men, and take to you hearts of valour, and have shame each of the other in the fierce conflict.
1048. Of men that have shame more are saved than are slain, but from them that flee cometh neither glory nor any avail.
1049. He spake, and hurled his spear swiftly and smote a foremost warrior, a comrade of great- souled Aeneas, Deïcoön, son of Pergasus, whom the Trojans honoured even as the sons of Priam, for that he was swift to fight amid the foremost.
1050. Him did lord Agamemnon smite with his spear upon the shield, and this stayed not the spear, but clean through it passed the bronze, and into the lower belly he drave it through the belt; and he fell with a thud, and upon him his armour clanged.
1051. Then Aeneas slew two champions of the Danaans, the sons of Diocles, Crethon and Orsilochus, whose father dwelt in well - built Pheme, a man rich in substance, and in lineage was he sprung from the river Alpheius that flows in broad stream through the land of the Pylians, and that begat Orsilochus to be king over many men.
1052. And Orsilochus begat greatsouled Diocles, and of Diocles were born twin sons, Crethon and Orsilochus, well skilled in all manner of fighting.
1053. Now when the twain had reached manhood, they followed with the Argives on the black ships to Ilios famed for its horses, seeking to win recompense for the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus; but their own selves in that land did the doom of death enfold.
1054. Like them two lions upon the mountain tops are reared by their dam in the thickets of a deep wood; and the twain snatch cattle and goodly sheep and make havoc of the farmsteads of men, until themuselves are slain by the hands of men with the sharp bronze; even in such wise were these twain vanquished beneath the hands of Aeneas, and fell like tall fir-trees.
1055. But as they fell Menelaus dear to Ares had pity for them, and strode through the foremost fighters, harnessed in flaming bronze and brandishing his spear; and Ares roused his might with intent that he might be vanquished beneath the hands of Aeneas.
1056. But Antilochus, son of great-souled Nestor, beheld him, and strode through the foremost fighters; for greatly did he fear for the shepherd of the host, lest aught befall him, and he utterly thwart them of their toil.
1057. Now the twain were holding forth their hands and their sharp spears each against the other, fain to do battle, when Antilochus came close beside the shepheard of the host.
1058. Then Aeneas abode not, swift warrior though he was, when he beheld the two holding their ground side by side; and they, when they had dragged the dead to the host of the Achaeans, laid the hapless pair in the arms of their comrades, and themselves turned back and fought amid the foremost.
1059. Then the twain slew Pylaemenes, peer of Ares, the leader of the great-souled Paphlagonian shieldmen.
1060. Him as he stood still, the son of Atreus, spear - famed Menelaus, pierced with his spear, smiting him upon the collar - bone; and Antilochus made a cast at Mydon, his squire and charioteer, the goodly son of Atymnius, even as he was turning the single - hooved horses, and smote him with a stone full upon the elbow; and the reins, white with ivory, fell from his hands to the ground in the dust.
1061. Then Antilochus leapt upon him and drave his sword into his temple, and gasping he fell forth from out the well - built car headlong in the dust on his head and shoulders.
1062. Long time he stood there — for he lighted on deep sand — until his horses kicked him and cast him to the ground in the dust; and them Antilochus lashed, and drave into the host of the Achaeans.
1063. But Hector marked them across the ranks, and rushed upon them shouting aloud, and with him followed the strong battalions of the Trojans; and Ares led them and the queen Enyo, she bringing ruthless Din of War, while Ares wielded in his hands a monstrous spear, and ranged now in front of Hector and now behind him.
1064. At sight of him Diomedes, good at the war - cry shuddered; and even as a man in passing over a great plain halteth in dismay at a swift - streaming river that floweth on to the sea, and seeing it seething with foam starteth backward, even so now did the son of Tydeus give ground, and he spake to the host: Friends, look you how we were ever wont to marvel at goodly Hector, deeming him a spearman and a dauntless warrior; whereas ever by his side is some god that wardeth from him ruin, even as now Ares is by his side in the likeness of a mortal man.
1065. But with faces turned toward the Trojans give ye ground ever backwards, neither rage ye to fight amain with gods.
1066. So spake he, and the Trojans came very close to them.
1067. Then Hector slew two warriors well skilled in fight, Menesthes and Anchialus, the twain being in one car.
1068. And as they fell great Telamonian Aias had pity of them, and came and stood close at hand, and with a cast of his shining spear smote Amphius, son of Selagus, that dwelt in Paesus, a man rich in substance, rich in corn -land; but fate led him to bear aid to Priam and his sons.
1069. Him Telamonian Aias smote upon the belt, and in the lower belly was the far-shadowing spear fixed, and he fell with a thud.
1070. Then glorious Aias rushed upon him to strip him of his armour, and the Trojans rained upon him their spears, all sharp and gleaming, and his shield caught many thereof.
1071. But he planted his heel upon the corpse and drew forth the spear of bronze, yet could he not prevail likewise to strip the rest of the fair armour from his shoulders, for he was sore pressed with missiles.
1072. Furthermore, he feared the strong defence of the lordly Trojans, that beset him both many and valiant with spears in their hands and, for all he was so tall and mighty and lordly, thrust him from them; and he gave ground and was made to reel.
1073. So these toiled in the mighty conflict, but Tlepolemus, son of Heracles, a valiant man and tall, was roused by resistless fate against godlike Sarpedon.
1074. And when they were come near as they advanced one against the other, the son and grandson of Zeus the cloud - gatherer, then Tlepolemus was first to speak, saying: Sarpedon, counsellor of the Lycians, why must thou be skulking here, that art a man unskilled in battle?
1075. They speak but a lie that say thou art sprung from Zeus that beareth the aegis, seeing thou art inferior far to those warriors that were sprung from Zeus in the days of men of old.
1076. Of other sort, men say, was mighty Heracles, my father, staunch in fight, the lionhearted, who on a time came hither by reason of the mares of Laomedon with but six ships and a scantier host, yet sacked the city of Ilios and made waste her streets.
1077. But thine is a coward's heart, and thy people are minishing.
1078. In no wise methinks shall thy coming from Lycia prove a defence to the men of Troy, though thou be never so strong, but thou shalt be vanquished by my hand and pass the gates of Hades.
1079. And to him Sarpedon, captain of the Lycians, made answer: Tlepolemus, thy sire verily destroyed sacred Ilios through the folly of the lordly man, Laomedon, who chid with harsh words him that had done him good service, and rendered him not the mares for the sake of which he had come from afar.
1080. But for thee, I deem that death and black fate shall here be wrought by my hands, and that vanquished beneath my spear thou shalt yield glory to me, and thy soul to Hades of the goodly steeds.
1081. So spake Sarpedon, and Tlepolemus lifted on high his ashen spear, and the long spears sped from the hands of both at one moment.
1082. Sarpedon smote him full upon the neck, and the grievous point passed clean through, and down upon his eyes came the darkness of night and enfolded him.
1083. And Tlepolemus smote Sarpedon upon the left thigh with his long spear, and the point sped through furiously and grazed the bone; howbeit his father as yet warded from him destruction.
1084. Then his goodly companions bare godlike Sarpedon forth from out the fight, and the long spear burdened him sore, as it trailed, but no man marked it or thought in their haste to draw forth from his thigh the spear of ash, that he might stand upon his feet; such toil had they in tending him.
1085. And on the other side the well - greaved Achaeans bare Tlepolemus from out the fight, and goodly Odysseus of the enduring soul was ware of it, and his spirit waxed furious within him; and he pondered then in heart and soul whether he should pursue further after the son of Zeus that thundereth aloud, or should rather take the lives of more Lycians.
1086. But not for great-hearted Odysseus was it ordained to slay with the sharp bronze the valiant son of Zeus; wherefore Athene turned his mind toward the host of the Lycians.
1087. Then slew he Coeranus and Alastor and Chromius and Alcandrus and Halius and Noëmon and Prytanis; and yet more of the Lycians would goodly Odysseus have slain, but that great Hector of the flashing helm was quick to see, and strode through the foremost fighters harnessed in flaming bronze, bringing terror to the Danaans.
1088. Then glad at his coming was Sarpedon, son of Zeus, and spake to him a piteous word: Son of Priam, suffer me not to lie here a prey to the Danaans, but bear me aid; thereafter, if need be, let life depart from me in your city, seeing it might not be that I should return home to mine own native land to make glad my dear wife and infant son.
1089. So spake he, yet Hector of the flashing helm spake no word in answer, but hastened by, eager with all speed to thrust back the Argives and take the lives of many.
1090. Then his goodly comrades made godlike Sarpedon to sit beneath a beauteous oak of Zeus that beareth the aegis, and forth from his thigh valiant Pelagon, that was his dear comrade, thrust the spear of ash; and his spirit failed him, and down over his eyes a mist was shed.
1091. Howbeit he revived, and the breath of the North Wind as it blew upon him made him to live again after in grievous wise he had breathed forth his spirit.
1092. But the Argives before the onset of Ares and Hector harnessed in bronze neither turned them to make for the black ships, nor yet could they hold out in fight, but they ever gave ground backward, when they heard that Ares was amid the Trojans.
1093. Who then was first to be slain and who last by Hector, Priam's son, and brazen Ares?
1094. Godlike Teuthras, and thereafter Orestes, driver of horses, Trechus, spearman of Aetolia, and Oenomaus, and Helenus, son of Oenops, and Oresbius with flashing taslet, he that dwelt in Hyle on the border of the Cephisian mere, having great care of his wealth; and hard by him dwelt other Boeotians having a land exceeding rich.
1095. But when the goddess, white - armed Hera, was ware of them as they made havoc of the Argives in the fierce conflict, forthwith she spake winged words to Athene:
1096. Out upon it, thou child of Zeus that beareth the aegis, unwearied one, verily it was for naught that we pledged our word to Menelaus, that not until he had sacked well - walled Ilios should he get him home, if we are to suffer baneful Ares thus to rage.
1097. Nay, come, let us twain likewise bethink us of furious valour.
1098. So spake she, and the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, failed not to hearken.
1099. Then Hera, the queenly goddess, daughter of great Cronos, went to and fro harnessing the horses of golden frontlets.
1100. and Hebe quickly put to the car on either side the curved wheels of bronze, eight - spoked, about the iron axle -tree.
1101. Of these the felloe verily is of gold imperishable, and thereover are tires of bronze fitted, a marvel to behold; and the naves are of silver, revolving on this side and on that; and the body is plaited tight with gold and silver thongs, and two rims there are that run about it.
1102. From the body stood forth the pole of silver, and on the end thereof she bound the fair golden yoke, and cast thereon the fair golden breast -straps; and Hera led beneath the yoke the swift - footed horses, and was eager for strife and the war-cry.
1103. But Athene, daughter of Zeus that beareth the aegis, let fall upon her father's floor her soft robe, richly broidered, that herself had wrought and her hands had fashioned, and put on her the tunic of Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, and arrayed her in armour for tearful war.
1104. About her shoulders she flung the tasselled aegis, fraught with terror, all about which Rout is set as a crown, and therein is Strife, therein Valour, and therein Onset, that maketh the blood run cold, and therein is the head of the dread monster, the Gorgon, dread and awful, a portent of Zeus that beareth the aegis.
1105. And upon her head she set the helmet with two horns and with bosses four, wrought of gold, and fitted with the men-at- arms of an hundred cities.
1106. Then she stepped upon the flaming car and grasped her spear, heavy and huge and strong, wherewith she vanquisheth the ranks of men — of warriors with whom she is wroth, she, the daughter of the mighty sire.
1107. And Hera swiftly touched the horses with the lash, and self - bidden groaned upon their hinges the gates of heaven which the Hours had in their keeping, to whom are entrusted great heaven and Olympus, whether to throw open the thick cloud or shut it to.
1108. There through the gate they drave their horses patient of the goad; and they found the son of Cronos as he sat apart from the other gods on the topmost peak of many - ridged Olympus.
1109. Then the goddess, white - armed Hera, stayed the horses, and made question of Zeus most high, the son of Cronos, and spake to him: Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation with Ares for these violent deeds, that he hath destroyed so great and so goodly a host of the Achaeans recklessly and in no seemly wise to my sorrow; while at their ease Cypris and Apollo of the silver bow take their joy, having set on this madman that regardeth not any law?
1110. Father Zeus, wilt thou in any wise be wroth with me if I smite Ares in sorry fashion and drive him out of the battle?
1111. Then in answer spake to her Zeus, the cloud - gatherer: Nay, come now, rouse against him Athene, driver of the spoil, who has ever been wont above others to bring sore pain upon him.
1112. So spake he, and the goddess, white - armed Hera, failed not to hearken, but touched her horses with the the lash; and nothing loath the pair flew on between earth and starry heaven.
1113. As far as a man seeth with his eyes into the haze of distance as he sitteth on a place of outlook and gazeth over the wine - dark deep, even so far do the loud - neighing horses of the gods spring at a bound.
1114. But when they were come to the land of Troy and the two flowing rivers, where the Simoïs and Scamander join their streams, there the goddess, white - armed Hera, stayed her horses, and loosed them from the car, and shed thick mist about them; and Simoïs made ambrosia to spring up for them to graze upon.
1115. Then the goddesses twain went their way with steps like those of timorous doves, eager to bring aid to the Argive warriors.
1116. And when they were come where the most and the bravest stood close thronging about mighty Diomedes, tamer of horses, in semblance like ravening lions or wild boars, whose is no weakling strength, there the goddess, white - armed Hera, stood and shouted in the likeness of great-hearted Stentor of the brazen voice, whose voice is as the voice of fifty other men:
1117. Fie, ye Argives, base things of shame fair in semblance only !
1118. So long as goodly Achilles was wont to fare into battle, never would the Trojans come forth even before the Dardanian gate; for of his mighty spear had they dread; but now far from the city they are fighting at the hollow ships.
1119. So saying she roused the strength and spirit of every man.
1120. And to the side of Tydeus' son sprang the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene.
1121. She found that prince beside his horses and car, cooling the wound that Pandarus had dealt him with his arrow.
1122. For the sweat vexed him beneath the broad baldric of his round shield; therewith was he vexed and his arm grew weary, so he was lifting up the baldric and wiping away the dark blood.
1123. Then the goddess laid hold of the yoke of his horses, and said:
1124. Verily little like himself was the son that Tydeus begat.
1125. Tydeus was small in stature, but a warrior.
1126. Even when I would not suffer him to fight or make a show of prowess, what time he came, and no Achaean with him, on an embassage to Thebes into the midst of the many Cadmeians — I bade him feast in their halls in peace — yet he having his valiant soul as of old challenged the youths of the Cadmeians and vanquished them in everything full easily; so' present a helper was I to him.
1127. But as for thee, I verily stand by thy side and guard thee, and of a ready heart I bid thee fight with the Trojans, yet either hath weariness born of thy many onsets entered into thy limbs, or haply spiritless terror possesseth thee.
1128. Then art thou no offspring of Tydeus, the wise - hearted son of Oeneus.
1129. Then in answer to her spake mighty Diomedes: I know thee, daughter of Zeus that beareth the aegis; therefore with a ready heart will I tell thee my thought and hide it not.
1130. In no wise doth spiritless terror possess me nor any slackness, but I am still mindful of thy behest which thou didst lay upon me.
1131. Thou wouldest not suffer me to fight face to face with the other blessed gods, but if Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus should enter the battle, her thou badest me smite with the sharp bronze.
1132. Therefore it is that I now give ground myself and have given command to all the rest of the Argives to be gathered here likewise; for I discern Ares lording it over the battle - field.
1133. And the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, answered him, saying: Son of Tydeus, Diomedes, dear to my heart, fear thou not Ares for that, neither any other of the immortals; so present a helper am I to thee.
1134. Nay, come, at Ares first drive thou thy single - hooved horses, and smite him in close fight, neither have thou awe of furious
1135. Ares that raveth here a full - wrought bane, a renegade, that but now spake with me and Hera, and made as though he would fight against the Trojans but give aid to the Argives; yet now he consorteth with the Trojans and hath forgotten these.
1136. So saying, with her hand she drew back Sthenelus, and thrust him from the car to earth, and he speedily leapt down; and she stepped upon the car beside goodly Diomedes, a goddess eager for battle.
1137. Loudly did the oaken axle creak beneath its burden, for it bare a dread goddess and a peerless warrior.
1138. Then Pallas Athene grasped the lash and the reins, and against Ares first she speedily drave the single - hooved horses.
1139. He was stripping of his armour huge Periphas that was far the best of the Aetolians, the glorious son of Ochesius.
1140. Him was blood - stained Ares stripping; but Athene put on the cap of Hades, to the end that mighty Ares should not see her.
1141. Now when Ares, the bane of mortals, was ware of goodly Diomedes, he let be huge Periphas to lie where he was, even where at the first he had slain him and taken away his life but made straight for Diomedes, tamer of horses.
1142. And when they were now come near as they advanced one against the other, Ares first let drive over the yoke and the reins of the horses with his spear of bronze, eager to take away the other's life; but the spear the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, caught in her hand and thrust above the car to fly its way in vain.
1143. Next Diomedes, good at the war-cry, drave at Ares with his spear of bronze, and Pallas Athene sped it mightily against his nethermost belly, where he was girded with his taslets.
1144. There did he thrust and smite him, rending the fair flesh, and forth he drew the spear again.
1145. Then brazen Ares bellowed loud as nine thousand warriors or ten thousand cry in battle, when they join in the strife of the War-god; and thereat trembling came upon Achaeans alike and Trojans, and fear gat hold of them; so mightily bellowed Ares insatiate of war.
1146. Even as a black darkness appeareth from the clouds when after heat a blustering wind ariseth, even in such wise unto Diomedes, son of Tydeus, did brazen Ares appear, as he fared amid the clouds unto broad heaven.
1147. Speedily he came to the abode of the gods, to steep Olympus, and sate him down by the side of Zeus, son of Cronos, grieved at heart, and shewed the immortal blood flowing from the wound, and with wailing spake to him winged words: Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation to behold these violent deeds?
1148. Ever do we gods continually suffer most cruelly by one another's devices, whenas we show favour to men.
1149. With thee are we all at strife, for thou art father to that mad and baneful maid, whose mind is ever set on deeds of lawlessness.
1150. For all the other gods that are in Olympus are obedient unto thee, and subject to thee, each one of us; but to her thou payest no heed whether in word or in deed, but rather settest her on, for that this pestilent maiden is thine own child.
1151. Now hath she set on the son of Tydeus, Diomedes high of heart, to vent his rage upon immortal gods.
1152. Cypris first he wounded with a thrust in close fight upon the hand at the wrist, and thereafter rushed upon mine own self as he had been a god.
1153. Howbeit my swift feet bare me away; otherwise had I long suffered woes there amid the gruesome heaps of the dead, or else had lived strengthless by reason of the smitings of the spear.
1154. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake to him Zeus, the cloud - gatherer:
1155. Sit thou not in any wise by me and whine, thou renegade.
1156. Most hateful to me art thou of all gods that hold Olympus, for ever is strife dear to thee and wars and fightings.
1157. Thou hast the unbearable, unyielding spirit of thy mother, even of Hera; her can I scarce control by my words.
1158. Wherefore it is by her promptings, meseems, that thou sufferest thus.
1159. Howbeit I will no longer endure that thou shouldest be in pain, for thou art mine offspring, and it was to me that thy mother bare thee; but wert thou born of any other god, thus pestilent as thou art, then long ere this hadst thou been lower than the sons of heaven.
1160. He spake, and bade Paeëon heal his hurt; and Paeëon spread thereon simples that slay pain, and healed him; for verily he was in no wise of mortal mould.
1161. Even as the juice of the fig speedily maketh to grow thick the white milk that is liquid, but is quickly curdled as a man stirreth it, even so swiftly healed he furious Ares.
1162. And Hebe bathed him, and clad him in beautiful raiment, and he sate him down by the side of Zeus, son of Cronos, exulting in his glory.
1163. Then back to the palace of great Zeus fared Argive Hera and Alalcomenean Athene, when they had made Ares, the bane of mortals, to cease from his man-slaying.
1164. So was the dread strife of the Trojans and Achaeans left to itself, and oft to this side and to that surged the battle over the plain, as they aimed one at the other their bronze- tipped spears between the Simoïs and the streams of Xanthus.
1165. Aias, son of Telamon, bulwark of the Achaeans was first to break a battalion of the Trojans, and to bring a light of deliverance to his comrades, for he smote a man that was chiefest among the Thracians, even Eüssorus' son Acamas, a valiant man and tall.
1166. Him he was first to smite upon the horn of his helmet with thick crest of horse - hair, and drave the spear into his forehead so that the point of bronze pierced within the bone; and darkness enfolded his eyes.
1167. And Diomedes, good at the war-cry, slew Axylus, Teuthras' son, that dwelt in well - built Arisbe, a man rich in substance, that was beloved of all men; for he dwelt in a home by the high - road and was wont to give entertainment to all.
1168. Howbeit of all these was there not one on this day to meet the foe before his face, and ward from him woeful destruction; but Diomedes robbed the twain of life, himself and his squire Calesius, that was then the driver of his car; so they two passed beneath the earth.
1169. Then Euryalus slew Dresus and Opheltius, and went on after Aesepus and Pedasus, whom on a time the fountain - nymph Abarbarea bare to peerless Bucolion.
1170. Now Bucolion was son of lordly Laomedon, his eldest born, though the mother that bare him was unwed; he while shepherding his flocks lay with the nymph in love, and she conceived and bare twin sons.
1171. Of these did the son of Mecisteus loose the might and the glorious limbs and strip the armour from their shoulders.
1172. And Polypoetes staunch in fight slew Astyalus, and Odysseus with his spear of bronze laid low Pidytes of Percote, and Teucer goodly Aretaon.
1173. And Antilochus, son of Nestor, slew Ablerus with his bright spear, and the king of men, Agamemnon, slew Elatus that dwelt in steep Pedasus by the banks of fair - flowing Satnioeis.
1174. And the warrior Leïtus slew Phylacus, as he fled before him; and Eurypylus laid Melanthius low.
1175. But Adrastus did Menelaus, good at the warcry, take alive; for his two horses, coursing in terror over the plain, became entangled in a tamarisk bough, and breaking the curved car at the end of the pole, themselves went on toward the city whither the rest were fleeing in rout; but their master rolled from out the car beside the wheel headlong in the dust upon his face.
1176. And to his side came Menelaus, son of Atreus, bearing his far-shadowing spear.
1177. Then Adrastus clasped him by the knees and besought him:
1178. Take me alive, thou son of Atreus, and accept a worthy ransom; treasures full many lie stored in the palace of my wealthy father, bronze and gold and iron wrought with toil; thereof would my father grant thee ransom past counting, should he hear that I am alive at the ships of the Achaeans.
1179. So spake he, and sought to persuade the other's heart in his breast, and lo, Menelaus was about to give him to his squire to lead to the swift ships of the Achaeans, but Agamemnon came running to meet him, and spake a word of reproof, saying: Soft-hearted Menelaus, why carest thou thus for the men?
1180. Hath then so great kindness been done thee in thy house by Trojans?
1181. Of them let not one escape sheer destruction and the might of our hands, nay, not the man-child whom his mother bears in her womb; let not even him escape, but let all perish together out of Ilios, unmourned and unmarked.
1182. So spake the warrior, and turned his brother's mind, for he counselled aright; so Menelaus with his hand thrust from him the warrior Adrastus, and lord Agamemnon smote him on the flank, and he fell backward; and the son of Atreus planted his heel on his chest, and drew forth the ashen spear.
1183. Then Nestor shouted aloud, and called to the Argives:
1184. My friends, Danaan warriors, squires of Ares, let no man now abide behind in eager desire for spoil, that he may come to the ships bearing the greatest store; nay, let us slay the men; thereafter in peace shall ye strip the armour from the corpses that lie dead over the plain.
1185. So saying he aroused the strength and spirit of every man.
1186. Then would the Trojans have been driven again by the Achaeans dear to Ares up to Ilios, vanquished in their weakness, had not the son of Priam, Helenus, far the best of augurs, come up to Aeneas and Hector, and said to them: Aeneas and Hector, seeing that upon you above all others rests the war-toil of Trojans and Lycians, for that in every undertaking ye are the best both in war and in counsel, hold ye your ground, and go ye this way and that throughout the host and keep them back before the gates, or ever in flight they fling themselves in their women's arms, and be made a joy to their foemen.
1187. But when ye have aroused all our battalions, we verily will abide here and fight against the Danaans, sore wearied though we be, for necessity weighs hard upon us; but do thou, Hector, go thy way to the city and speak there to her that is thy mother and mine; let her gather the aged wives to the temple of flashing - eyed Athene in the citadel, and when she has opened with the key the doors of the holy house, the robe that seemeth to her the fairest and amplest in her hall, and that is far dearest to her own self, this let her lay upon the knees of fair - haired Athene, and vow to her that she will sacrifice in her temple twelve sleek heifers that have not felt the goad, if she will have compassion on the city and the Trojan's wives and their little children; in hope she may hold back from sacred Ilios the son of Tydeus, that savage spearman, a mighty deviser of rout, who has verily, meseems, proved himself the mightiest of the Achaeans.
1188. Not even Achilles did we ever fear on this wise, that leader of men, who, they say, is born of a goddess; nay this man rageth beyond all measure, and no one can vie with him in might.
1189. So spake he, and Hector was in no wise disobedient unto his brother's word.
1190. Forthwith he leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground, and brandishing his two sharp spears went everywhere throughout host, urging them to fight; and he roused the dread din of battle.
1191. So they rallied, and took their stand with their faces toward the Achaeans, and the Argives gave ground and ceased from slaying; and they deemed that one of the immortals had come down from starry heaven to bear aid to the Trojans, that they rallied thus.
1192. And Hector shouted aloud and called to the Trojans: Ye Trojans, high of heart, and far - famed allies, be men, my friends, and bethink you of furious valour, the while I go to Ilios and bid the elders that give counsel, and our wives to make prayer to the gods, and promise them hecatombs.
1193. So saying, Hector of the flashing helm departed, and the black hide at either end smote against his ankles and his neck, even the rim that ran about the outermost edge of his bossed shield.
1194. But Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, and the son of Tydeus came together in the space between the two hosts, eager to do battle.
1195. And when the twain were now come near as they advanced one against the other, Diomedes, good at the war-cry, was first to speak, saying:
1196. Who art thou, mighty one, among mortal men?
1197. For never have I seen thee in battle where men win glory until this day, but now hast thou come forth far in advance of all in thy hardihood, in that thou abidest my far-shadowing spear.
1198. Unhappy are they whose children face my might.
1199. But and if thou art one of the immortals come down from heaven, then will I not fight with the heavenly gods.
1200. Nay, for even the son of Dryas, mighty Lycurgus, lived not long, seeing that he strove with heavenly gods — he that on a time drave down over the sacred mount of Nysa the nursing mothers of mad Dionysus; and they all let fall to the ground their wands, smitten with an ox- goad by man-slaying Lycurgus.
1201. But Dionysus fled, and plunged beneath the wave of the sea, and Thetis received him in her bosom, filled with dread, for mighty terror gat hold of him at the man's threatenings.
1202. Then against Lycurgus did the gods that live at ease wax wroth, and the son of Cronos made him blind; and he lived not for long, seeing that he was hated of all the immortal gods.
1203. So would not I be minded to fight against the blessed gods.
1204. But if thou art of men, who eat the fruit of the field, draw nigh, that thou mayest the sooner enter the toils of destruction.
1205. Then spake to him the glorious son of Hippolochus: Great -souled son of Tydeus, wherefore inquirest thou of my lineage?
1206. Even as are the generations of leaves, such are those also of men.
1207. As for the leaves, the wind scattereth some upon the earth, but the forest, as it bourgeons, putteth forth others when the season of spring is come; even so of men one generation springeth up and another passeth away.
1208. Howbeit, if thou wilt, hear this also, that thou mayest know well my lineage; and many there be that know it.
1209. There is a city Ephyre in the heart of Argos, pasture - land of horses, and there dwelt Sisyphus that was craftiest of men, Sisyphus, son of Aeolus; and he begat a son Glaucus; and Glaucus begat peerless Bellerophon.
1210. To him the gods granted beauty and lovely manliness; but Proetus in his heart devised against him evil, and drave him, seeing he was mightier far, from the land of the Argives; for Zeus had made them subject to his sceptre.
1211. Now the wife of Proetus, fair Anteia, lusted madly for Bellerophon, to lie with him in secret love, but could in no wise prevail upon wise - hearted Bellerophon, for that his heart was upright.
1212. So she made a tale of lies, and spake to king Proetus:
1213. Either die thyself, Proetus, or slay Bellerophon, So she spake, and wrath gat hold upon the king to hear that word.
1214. To slay him he forbare, for his soul had awe of that; but he sent him to Lycia, and gave him baneful tokens, graving in a folded tablet many signs and deadly, and bade him show these to his own wife's father, that he might be slain.
1215. So he went his way to Lycia under the blameless escort of the gods.
1216. And when he was come to Lycia and the stream of Xanthus, then with a ready heart did the king of wide Lycia do him honour: for nine days' space he shewed him entertainment, and slew nine oxen.
1217. Howbeit when the tenth rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, then at length he questioned him and asked to see whatever token he bare from his daughter's husband, Proetus.
1218. But when he had received from him the evil token of his daughter's husband, first he bade him slay the raging Chimaera.
1219. She was of divine stock, not of men, in the fore part a lion, in the hinder a serpent, and in the midst a goat, breathing forth in terrible wise the might of blazing fire.
1220. And Bellerophon slew her, trusting in the signs of the gods.
1221. Next fought he with the glorious Solymi, and this, said he was the mightest battle of warriors that ever he entered; and thirdly he slew the Amazons, women the peers of men.
1222. And against him, as he journeyed back therefrom, the king wove another cunning wile; he chose out of wide Lycia the bravest men and set an ambush; but these returned not home in any wise, for peerless Bellerophon slew them one and all.
1223. But when the king now knew that he was the valiant offspring of a god, he kept him there, and offered him his own daughter, and gave to him the half of all his kingly honour; moreover the Lycians meted out for him a demesne pre-eminent above all, a fair tract of orchard and of plough - land, to possess it.
1224. And the lady bare to wise - hearted Bellerophon three children, Isander and Hippolochus and Laodameia.
1225. With Laodameia lay Zeus the counsellor, and she bare godlike Sarpedon, the warrior harnessed in bronze.
1226. But when even Bellerophon came to be hated of all the gods, then verily he wandered alone over the Aleian plain, devouring his own soul, and shunning the paths of men; and Isander his son was slain by Ares, insatiate of battle, as he fought against the glorious Solymi; and his daughter was slain in wrath by Artemis of the golden reins.
1227. But Hippolochus begat me and of him do I declare that I am sprung; and he sent me to Troy and straitly charged me ever to be bravest and pre-eminent above all, and not bring shame upon the race of my fathers, that were far the noblest in Ephyre and in wide Lycia.
1228. This is the lineage and the blood whereof I avow me sprung.
1229. So spake he, and Diomedes, good at the warcry, waxed glad.
1230. He planted his spear in the bounteous earth, and with gentle words spake to the shepherd of the host:
1231. Verily now art thou a friend of my father's house from of old: for goodly Oeneus on a time entertained peerless Bellerophon in his halls, and kept him twenty days; and moreover they gave one to the other fair gifts of friendship.
1232. Oeneus gave a belt bright with scarlet, and Bellerophon a double cup of gold which I left in my palace as I came hither.
1233. But Tydeus I remember not, seeing I was but a little child when he left, what time the host of the Achaeans perished at Thebes.
1234. Therefore now am I a dear guest -friend to thee in the midst of Argos, and thou to me in Lycia, whenso I journey to the land of that folk.
1235. So let us shun one another's spears even amid the throng; full many there be for me to slay, both Trojans and famed allies, whomsoever a god shall grant me and my feet overtake; and many Achaeans again for thee to slay whomsoever thou canst.
1236. And let us make exchange of armour, each with the other, that these men too may know that we declare ourselves to be friends from our fathers' days.
1237. When they had thus spoken, the twain leapt down from their chariots and clasped each other's hands and pledged their faith.
1238. And then from Glaucus did Zeus, son of Cronos, take away his wit, seeing he made exchange of armour with Diomedes, son of Tydeus, giving golden for bronze, the worth of an hundred oxen for the worth of nine.
1239. But when Hector was come to the Scaean gate and the oak -tree, round about him came running the wives and daughters of the Trojans asking of their sons and brethren and friends and husbands.
1240. But he thereupon bade them make prayer to the gods, all of them in turn; yet over many were sorrows hung.
1241. But when he was now come to the beauteous palace of Priam, adorned with polished colonnades — and in it were fifty chambers of polished stone, built each hard by the other; therein the sons of Priam were wont to sleep beside their wedded wives; and for his daughters over against them on the opposite side within the court were twelve roofed chambers of polished stone, built each hard by the other; therein slept Priam's sons - in - law beside their chaste wives — there his bounteous mother came to meet him, leading in Laodice, fairest of her daughters to look upon; and she clasped him by the hand and spake and addressed him:
1242. My child, why hast thou left the fierce battle and come hither?
1243. Of a surety the sons of the Achaeans, of evil name, are pressing sore upon thee as they fight about our city, and thy heart hath bid thee come hitherward and lift up thy hands to Zeus from the citadel.
1244. But stay till I have brought thee honey - sweet wine that thou mayest pour libation to Zeus and the other immortals first, and then shalt thou thyself have profit thereof, if so be thou wilt drink.
1245. When a man is spent with toil wine greatly maketh his strength to wax, even as thou art spent with defending thy fellows.
1246. Then in answer to her spake great Hector of the flashing helm:
1247. Bring me no honey - hearted wine, honoured mother, lest thou cripple me, and I be forgetful of my might and my valour; moreover with hands unwashen I have awe to pour libation of flaming wine to Zeus; nor may it in any wise be that a man should make prayer to the son of Cronos, lord of the dark clouds, all befouled with blood and filth.
1248. Nay, do thou go to the temple of Athene, driver of the spoil, with burnt-offerings, when thou hast gathered together the aged wives; and the robe that seemeth to thee the fairest and amplest in thy hall, and that is dearest far to thine own self, this do thou lay upon the knees of fair - haired Athene and vow to her that thou wilt sacrifice in her temple twelve sleek heifers that have not felt the goad, if she will take pity on Troy and the Trojans' wives and their little children; in hope she may hold back the son of Tydeus from sacred Ilios, that savage spearman, a mighty deviser of rout.
1249. So go thou to the temple of Athene, driver of the spoil; and I will go after Paris, to summon him, if haply he will hearken to my bidding.
1250. Would that the earth might straightway gape for him !
1251. for in grievous wise hath the Olympian reared him as a bane to the Trojans and to great-hearted Priam, and the sons of Priam.
1252. If I but saw him going down to the house of Hades, then might I deem that my heart had forgotten its woe.
1253. So spake he, and she went to the hall and called to her handmaidens; and they gathered together the aged wives throughout the city.
1254. But the queen herself went down to the vaulted treasurechamber wherein were her robes, richly broidered, the handiwork of Sidonian women, whom godlike Alexander had himself brought from Sidon, as he sailed over the wide sea on that journey on the which he brought back high - born Helen.
1255. Of these Hecabe took one, and bare it as an offering for Athene, the one that was fairest in its broiderings and amplest, and shone like a star, and lay undermost of all.
1256. Then she went her way, and the throng of aged wives hastened after her.
1257. Now when they were come to the temple of Athene in the citadel, the doors were opened for them by fair - cheeked Theano, daughter of Cisseus, the wife of Antenor, tamer of horses; for her had the Trojans made priestess of Athene.
1258. Then with sacred cries they all lifted up their hands to Athene; and fair - cheeked Theano took the robe and laid it upon the knees of fair - haired Athene, and with vows made prayer to the daughter of great Zeus: Lady Athene, that dost guard our city, fairest among goddesses, break now the spear of Diomedes, and grant furthermore that himself may fall headlong before the Scaean gates; to the end that we may now forthwith sacrifice to thee in thy temple twelve sleek heifers that have not felt the goad, if thou wilt take pity on Troy and the Trojans' wives and their little children.
1259. So spake she praying, but Pallas Athene denied the prayer.
1260. Thus were these praying to the daughter of great Zeus, but Hector went his way to the palace of Alexander, the fair palace that himself had builded with the men that were in that day the best builders in deep-soiled Troy; these had made him a chamber and hall and court hard by the palaces of Priam and Hector in the citadel.
1261. There entered in Hector, dear to Zeus, and in his hand he held a spear of eleven cubits, and before him blazed the spear-point of bronze, around which ran a ring of gold.
1262. He found Paris in his chamber busied with his beauteous arms, his shield and his corselet, and handling his curved bow; and Argive Helen sat amid her serving - women and appointed to them their glorious handiwork.
1263. And at sight of him Hector rebuked him with words of shame: Strange man, thou dost not well to nurse this anger in thy heart.
1264. Thy people are perishing about the town and the steep wall in battle, and it is because of thee that the battle - cry and the war are ablaze about this city; thou wouldest thyself vent wrath on any other, whomso thou shouldest haply see shrinking from hateful war.
1265. Nay, then, rouse thee, lest soon the city blaze with consuming fire.
1266. And to him did godlike Alexander make answer, saying:
1267. Hector, seeing that thou dost chide me duly, and not beyond what is due, therefore will I tell thee; and do thou take thought and hearken unto me.
1268. Not so much by reason of wrath and indignation against the Trojans sat I in my chamber, but I was minded to yield myself to sorrow.
1269. Even now my wife sought to turn my mind with gentle words and urged me to the war: and I, mine own self, deem that it will be better so; victory shifteth from man to man.
1270. But come now, tarry a while, let me don my harness of war; or go thy way, and I will follow; and methinks I shall overtake thee.
1271. So said he, and Hector of the flashing helm answered him not a word, but unto him spake Helen with gentle words: O Brother of me that am a dog, a contriver of mischief and abhorred of all, I would that on the day when first my mother gave me birth an evil storm - wind had borne me away to some mountain or to the wave of the loud - resounding sea, where the wave might have swept me away or ever these things came to pass.
1272. Howbeit, seeing the gods thus ordained these ills, would that I had been wife to a better man, that could feel the indignation of his fellows and their many revilings.
1273. But this man's understanding is not now stable, nor ever will be hereafter; thereof I deem that he will e'en reap the fruit.
1274. But come now, enter in, and sit thee upon this chair, my brother, since above all others has trouble encompassed thy heart because of shameless me, and the folly of Alexander; on whom Zeus hath brought an evil doom, that even in days to come we may be a song for men that are yet to be.
1275. Then made answer to her great Hector of the flashing helm:
1276. Bid me not sit, Helen, for all thou lovest me; thou wilt not persuade me.
1277. Even now my heart is impatient to bear aid to the Trojans that sorely long for me that am not with them.
1278. Nay, but rouse thou this man, and let him of himself make haste, that he may overtake me while yet I am within the city.
1279. For I shall go to my home, that I may behold my housefolk, my dear wife, and my infant son; for I know not if any more I shall return home to them again, or if even now the gods will slay me beneath the hands of the Achaeans.
1280. So saying, Hector of the flashing helm departed, and came speedily to his well - built house.
1281. But he found not white - armed Andromache in his halls; she with her child and a fair - robed handmaiden had taken her stand upon the wall, weeping and wailing.
1282. So Hector when he found not his peerless wife within, went and stood upon the threshold, and spake amid the serving - women:
1283. Come now, ye serving - women, tell me true; whither went white - armed Andromache from the hall?
1284. Is she gone to the house of any of my sisters or my brothers' fair - robed wives, or to the temple of Athene, where the other fair - tressed women of Troy are seeking to propitiate he dread goddess?
1285. Then a busy house - dame spake to him, saying:
1286. Hector, seeing thou straitly biddest us tell thee true, neither is she gone to any of thy sisters or thy brothers' fair - robed wives, nor yet to the temple of Athene, where the other fair - tressed Trojan women are seeking to propitiate the dread goddess; but she went to the great wall of Ilios, for that she heard the Trojans were sorely pressed, and great victory rested with the Achaeans.
1287. So is she gone in haste to the wall, like one beside herself; and with her the nurse beareth the child.
1288. So spake the house - dame, and Hector hasted from the house back over the same way along the well - built streets.
1289. When now he was come to the gate, as he passed through the great city, the Scaean gate, whereby he was minded to go forth to the plain, there came running to meet him his bounteous wife, Andromache, daughter of great-hearted Eëtion, Eëtion that dwelt beneath wooded Placus, in Thebe under Placus, and was lord over the men of Cilicia; for it was his daughter that bronze- harnessed Hector had to wife.
1290. She now met him, and with her came a handmaid bearing in her bosom the tender boy, a mere babe, the well - loved son of Hector, like to a fair star.
1291. Him Hector was wont to call Scamandrius, but other men Astyanax; for only Hector guarded Ilios.
1292. Then Hector smiled, as he glanced at his boy in silence, but Andromache came close to his side weeping, and clasped his hand and spake to him, saying:
1293. Ah, my husband, this prowess of thine will be thy doom, neither hast thou any pity for thine infant child nor for hapless me that soon shall be thy widow; for soon will the Achaeans all set upon thee and slay thee.
1294. But for me it were better to go down to the grave if I lose thee, for nevermore shall any comfort be mine, when thou hast met thy fate, but only woes.
1295. Neither father have I nor queenly mother.
1296. My father verily goodly Achilles slew, for utterly laid he waste the well - peopled city of the Cilicians, even Thebe of lofty gates.
1297. He slew Eëtion, yet he despoiled him not, for his soul had awe of that; but he burnt him in his armour, richly dight, and heaped over him a barrow; and all about were elm-trees planted by nymphs of the mountain, daughters of Zeus that beareth the aegis.
1298. And the seven brothers that were mine in our halls, all these on the selfsame day entered into the house of Hades, for all were slain of swift - footed, goodly Achilles, amid their kine of shambling gait and their white - fleeced sheep.
1299. And my mother, that was queen beneath wooded Placus, her brought he hither with the rest of the spoil, but thereafter set her free, when he had taken ransom past counting; and in her father's halls Artemis the archer slew her.
1300. Nay, Hector, thou art to me father and queenly mother, thou art brother, and thou art my stalwart husband.
1301. Come now, have pity, and remain here on the wall, lest thou make thy child an orphan and thy wife a widow.
1302. And for thy host, stay it by the wild fig-tree, where the city may best be scaled, and the wall is open to assault.
1303. For thrice at this point came the most valiant in company with the twain Aiantes and glorious Idomeneus and the sons of Atreus and the valiant son of Tydeus, and made essay to enter: whether it be that one well - skilled in soothsaying told them, or haply their own spirit urgeth and biddeth them thereto.
1304. Then spake to her great Hector of the flashing helm: Woman, I too take thought of all this, but wondrously have I shame of the Trojans, and the Trojans' wives, with trailing robes, if like a coward I skulk apart from the battle.
1305. Nor doth mine own heart suffer it, seeing I have learnt to be valiant always and to fight amid the foremost Trojans, striving to win my father's great glory and mine own.
1306. For of a surety know I this in heart and soul: the day shall come when sacred Ilios shall be laid low, and Priam, and the people of Priam with goodly spear of ash.
1307. Yet not so much doth the grief of the Trojans that shall be in the aftertime move me, neither Hecabe's own, nor king Priam's, nor my brethren's, many and brave, who then shall fall in the dust beneath the hands of their foemen, as doth thy grief, when some brazen - coated Achaean shall lead thee away weeping and rob thee of thy day of freedom.
1308. Then haply in Argos shalt thou ply the loom at another s bidding, or bear water from Messeis or Hypereia, sorely against thy will, and strong necessity shall be laid upon thee.
1309. And some man shall say as he beholdeth thee weeping:
1310. Lo, the wife of Hector, that was pre-eminent in war above all the horse - taming Trojans, in the day when men fought about Ilios.
1311. So shall one say; and to thee shall come fresh grief in thy lack of a man like me to ward off the day of bondage.
1312. But let me be dead, and let the heaped - up earth cover me, ere I hear thy cries as they hale thee into captivity.
1313. So saying, glorious Hector stretched out his arms to his boy, but back into the bosom of his fair - girdled nurse shrank the child crying, affrighted at the aspect of his dear father, and seized with dread of the bronze and the crest of horse - hair, as he marked it waving dreadfully from the topmost helm.
1314. Aloud then laughed his dear father and queenly mother; and forthwith glorious Hector took the helm from his head and laid it all - gleaming upon the ground.
1315. But he kissed his dear son, and fondled him in his arms, and spake in prayer to Zeus and the other gods:
1316. Zeus and ye other gods, grant that this my child may likewise prove, even as I, pre-eminent amid the Trojans, and as valiant in might, and that he rule mightily over Ilios.
1317. And some day may some man say of him as he cometh back from war, ‘ He is better far than his father’; and may he bear the blood - stained spoils of the foeman he hath slain, and may his mother's heart wax glad.
1318. So saying, he laid his child in his dear wife's arms, and she took him to her fragrant bosom, smiling through her tears; and her husband was touched with pity at sight of her, and he stroked her with his hand, and spake to her, saying:
1319. Dear wife, in no wise, I pray thee, grieve overmuch at heart; no man beyond my fate shall send me forth to Hades; only his doom, methinks, no man hath ever escaped, be he coward or valiant, when once he hath been born.
1320. Nay, go thou to the house and busy thyself with thine own tasks, the loom and the distaff, and bid thy handmaids ply their work: but war shall be for men, for all, but most of all for me, of them that dwell in Ilios.
1321. So spake glorious Hector and took up his helm with horse - hair crest; and his dear wife went forthwith to her house, oft turning back, and shedding big tears.
1322. Presently she came to the well - built palace of man-slaying Hector and found therein her many handmaidens; and among them all she roused lamentation.
1323. So in his own house they made lament for Hector while yet he lived; for they deemed that he should never more come back from battle, escaped from the might and the hands of the Achaeans.
1324. Nor did Paris tarry long in his lofty house, but did on his glorious armour, dight with bronze, and hastened through the city, trusting in his fleetness of foot.
1325. Even as when a stalled horse that has fed his fill at the manger breaketh his halter and runneth stamping over the plain — being wont to bathe him in the fair - flowing river — and exulteth; on high doth he hold his head, and about his shoulders his mane floateth streaming, and as he glorieth in his splendour, his knees nimbly bear him to the haunts and pastures of mares; even so Paris, son of Priam, strode down from high Pergamus, all gleaming in his armour like the shining sun, laughing for glee, and his swift feet bare him on.
1326. Speedily then he overtook goodly Hector, his brother, even as he was about to turn back from the place where he had dallied with his wife.
1327. Then godlike Alexander was first to speak to him, saying:
1328. My brother, full surely I delay thee in thine haste by my long tarrying, and came not in due season, as thou badest me.
1329. Then in answer to him spake Hector of the flashing helm: Strange man, no one that is rightminded could make light of thy work in battle, for thou art valiant; but of thine own will art thou slack, and hast no care; and thereat my heart is grieved within me, whenso I hear regarding thee words of shame from the lips of the Trojans, who because of thee have grievous toil.
1330. But let us go our way; these things we will make good hereafter, if so be Zeus shall grant us to set for the heavenly gods that are for ever a bowl of deliverance in our halls, when we have driven forth from the land of Troy the well - greaved Achaeans.
1331. So saying, glorious Hector hastened forth from the gates, and with him went his brother Alexander; and in their hearts were both eager for war and battle.
1332. And as a god giveth to longing seamen a fair wind when they have grown weary of beating the sea with polished oars of fir, and with weariness are their limbs fordone; even so appeared these twain to the longing Trojans.
1333. Then the one of them slew the son of king Areithous, Menesthius, that dwelt in Arne, who was born of the mace - man Areithous and ox -eyed Phylomedusa; and Hector with his sharp spear smote Eioneus on the neck beneath the well - wrought helmet of bronze, and loosed his limbs.
1334. And Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, leader of the Lycians, made a cast with his spear in the fierce conflict at Iphinous, son of Dexios, as he sprang upon his car behind his swift mares, and smote him upon the shoulder; so he fell from his chariot to the ground and his limbs were loosed.
1335. But when the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, was ware of them as they were slaying the Argives in the fierce conflict, she went darting down from the peaks of Olympus to sacred Ilios.
1336. And Apollo sped forth to meet her, for he looked down from out of Pergamus and beheld her, and was fain to have victory for the Trojans.
1337. So the twain met one with the other by the oak -tree.
1338. Then to her spake first the king Apollo, son of Zeus: Wherefore art thou again come thus eagerly from Olympus, thou daughter of great Zeus, and why hath thy proud spirit sent thee?
1339. Is it that thou mayest give to the Danaans victory to turn the tide of battle, seeing thou hast no pity for the Trojans, that perish?
1340. But if thou wouldst in anywise hearken unto me — and so would it be better far — let us now stay the war and fighting for this day.
1341. Hereafter shall they fight again until they win the goal of Ilios, since thus it seemeth good to the hearts of you immortal goddesses, to lay waste this city.
1342. And in answer to him spake the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene:
1343. So be it, thou god that workest afar; with this in mind am I myself come from Olympus to the midst of Trojans and Achaeans.
1344. But come, how art thou minded to stay the battle of the warriors?
1345. Then in answer to her spake king Apollo, son of Zeus:
1346. Let us rouse the valiant spirit of horse - taming Hector, in hope that he may challenge some one of the Danaans in single fight to do battle with him man to man in dread combat.
1347. So shall the bronze - greaved Achaeans have indignation and rouse some one to do battle in single combat against goodly Hector.
1348. So he spake, and the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, failed not to hearken.
1349. And Helenus, the dear son of Priam, understood in spirit this plan that had found pleasure with the gods in council; and he came and stood by Hector's side, and spake to him, saying: Hector, son of Priam, peer of Zeus in counsel, wouldst thou now in anywise hearken unto me?
1350. for I am thy brother.
1351. Make the Trojans to sit down, and all the Achaeans, and do thou challenge whoso is best of the Achaeans to do battle with thee man to man in dread combat.
1352. Not yet is it thy fate to die and meet thy doom; for thus have I heard the voice of the gods that are for ever.
1353. So spake he and Hector rejoiced greatly when he heard his words; and he went into the midst and kept back the battalions of the Trojans with his spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them down, and Agamemnon made the well - greaved Achaeans to sit.
1354. And Athene and Apollo of the silver bow in the likeness of vultures sate them upon the lofty oak of father Zeus that beareth the aegis, rejoicing in the warriors; and the ranks of these sat close, bristling with shields and helms and spears.
1355. Even as there is spread over the face of the deep the ripple of the West Wind, that is newly risen, and the deep groweth black beneath it, so sat the ranks of the Achaeans and Trojans in the plain.
1356. And Hector spake between the two hosts: Hear me, ye Trojans and well - greaved Achaeans, that I may speak what the heart in my breast biddeth me.
1357. Our oaths the son of Cronos, throned on high, brought not to fulfillment, but with ill intent ordaineth a time for both hosts, until either ye take well - walled Troy or yourselves be vanquished beside your sea-faring ships.
1358. With you are the chieftains of the whole host of the Achaeans; of these let now that man whose heart soever biddeth him fight with me, come hither from among you all to be your champion against goodly Hector.
1359. And thus do I declare my word, and be Zeus our witness thereto: if so be he shall slay me with the long - edged bronze, let him spoil me of my armour and bear it to the hollow ships, but my body let him give back to my home, that the Trojans and the Trojan wives may give me my due meed of fire in my death.
1360. But if so be I slay him, and Apollo give me glory, I will spoil him of his armour and bear it to sacred Ilios and hang it upon the temple of Apollo, the god that smiteth afar, but his corpse will I render back to the well - benched ships, that the long - haired Achaeans may give him burial, and heap up for him a barrow by the wide Hellespont.
1361. And some one shall some day say even of men that are yet to be, as he saileth in his many - benched ship over the wine - dark sea: ‘ This is a barrow of a man that died in olden days, whom on a time in the midst of his prowess glorious Hector slew.’
1362. So shall some man say, and my glory shall never die.
1363. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence; shame had they to deny him, but they feared to meet him.
1364. Howbeit at length Menelaus arose among them and spake, chiding them with words of reviling, and deeply did he groan at heart:
1365. Ah me, Ye braggarts, ye women of Achaea, men no more !
1366. Surely shall this be a disgrace dread and dire, if no man of the Danaans shall now go to meet Hector.
1367. Nay, may ye one and all turn to earth and water, ye that sit there each man with no heart in him, utterly inglorious.
1368. Against this man will I myself arm me; but from on high are the issues of victory holden of the immortal gods.
1369. So spake he, and did on his fair armour.
1370. And now Menelaus, would the end of life have appeared for thee at the hands of Hector, seeing he was mightier far, had not the kings of the Achaeans sprung up and laid hold of thee.
1371. And Atreus' son himself, wide - ruling Agamemnon, caught him by the right hand and spake to him, saying:
1372. Thou art mad, Menelaus, nurtured of Zeus, and this thy madness beseemeth thee not.
1373. Hold back, for all thy grief, and be not minded in rivalry to fight with one better than thou, even with Hector, son of Priam, of whom others besides thee are adread.
1374. Even Achilles shuddereth to meet this man in battle, where men win glory; and he is better far than thou.
1375. Nay, go thou for this present, and sit thee amid the company of thy fellows; against this man shall the Achaeans raise up another champion.
1376. Fearless though he be and insatiate of battle, methinks he will be glad to bend his knees in rest, if so be he escape from the fury of war and the dread conflict.
1377. So spake the warrior and turned his brother's mind, for he counselled aright; and Menelaus obeyed.
1378. Then with gladness his squires took his armour from his shoulders; and Nestor rose up and spake amid the Argives:
1379. Fie upon you !
1380. In good sooth is great grief come upon the land of Achaea.
1381. Verily aloud would old Peleus groan, the driver of chariots, goodly counsellor, and orator of the Myrmidons, who on a time questioned me in his own house, and rejoiced greatly as he asked of the lineage and birth of all the Argives.
1382. If he were to hear that these were now all cowering before Hector then would he lift up his hands to the immortals in instant prayer that his soul might depart from his limbs into the house of Hades.
1383. I would, O father Zeus and Athene and Apollo, that I were young as when beside swift -flowing Celadon the Pylians and Arcadians that rage with spears gathered together and fought beneath the walls of Pheia about the streams of Iardanus.
1384. On their side stood forth Ereuthalion as champion, a godlike man, bearing upon his shoulders the armour of king Areithous, goodly Areithous that men and fair - girdled women were wont to call the mace - man, for that he fought not with bow or long spear, but with a mace of iron brake the battalions.
1385. Him Lycurgus slew by guile and nowise by might, in a narrow way, where his mace of iron saved him not from destruction.
1386. For ere that might be Lycurgus came upon him at unawares and pierced him through the middle with his spear, and backward was he hurled upon the earth; and Lycurgus despoiled him of the armour that brazen Ares had given him.
1387. This armour he thereafter wore himself amid the turmoil of Ares, but when Lycurgus grew old within his halls he gave it to Ereuthalion, his dear squire, to wear.
1388. And wearing this armour did Ereuthalion challenge all the bravest; but they trembled sore and were afraid, nor had any man courage to abide him.
1389. But me did my enduring heart set on to battle with him in my hardihood, though in years I was youngest of all.
1390. So fought I with him, and Athene gave me glory.
1391. The tallest was he and the strongest man that ever I slew: as a huge sprawling bulk he lay stretched this way and that.
1392. Would I were now as young and my strength as firm, then should Hector of the flashing helm soon find one to face him.
1393. Whereas ye that are chieftains of the whole host of the Achaeans, even ye are not minded with a ready heart to meet Hector face to face.
1394. So the old man chid them, and there stood up nine in all.
1395. Upsprang far the first the king of men, Agamemnon, and after him Tydeus' son, mighty Diomedes, and after them the Aiantes, clothed in furious valour, and after them Idomeneus and Idomeneus' comrade Meriones, the peer of Enyalius, slayer of men, and after them Eurypylus, the glorious son of Euaemon; and upsprang Thoas, son of Andraemon, and goodly Odysseus; all these were minded to do battle with goodly Hector.
1396. Then among them spake again the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia:
1397. Cast ye the lot now from the first unto the last for him whoso shall be chosen; for he shall verily profit the well - greaved Achaeans and himself in his own soul shall profit withal, if so be he escape from the fury of war and the dread conflict.
1398. So said he, and they marked each man his lot and cast them in the helmet of Agamemnon, son of Atreus; and the host made prayer, and lifted up their hands to the gods.
1399. And thus would one say with a lance up to the broad heaven: Father Zeus, grant that the lot fall of Aias or the son of Tydeus or else on the king himself of Mycene rich in gold.
1400. So spake they, and the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, shook the helmet, and forth therefrom leapt the lot that themselves desired, even the lot of Aias.
1401. And the herald bare it everywhither throughout the throng, and showed it from left to right to all the chieftains of the Achaeans; but they knew it not, and denied it every man.
1402. But when in bearing it everywhither throughout the throng he was come to him that had marked it and cast it into the helm, even to glorious Aias, then Aias held forth his hand, and the herald drew near and laid the lot therein; and Aias knew at a glance the token on the lot, and waxed glad at heart.
1403. The lot then he cast upon the ground beside his foot, and spake:
1404. My friends, of a surety the lot is mine, and mine own heart rejoiceth, for I deem that I shall vanquish goodly Hector.
1405. But come now, while I am doing on me my battle gear, make ye prayer the while to king Zeus, son of Cronos, in silence by yourselves, that the Trojans learn naught thereof — nay, or openly, if ye will, since in any case we fear no man.
1406. For by force shall no man drive me in flight of his own will and in despite of mine, nor yet by skill; since as no skilless wight methinks was I born and reared in Salamis.
1407. So spake he, and they made prayer to king Zeus, son of Cronos; and thus would one speak with a glance up to the broad heaven: Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, vouchsafe victory to Aias and that he win him glorious renown; or if so be thou lovest Hector too, and carest for him, vouchsafe to both equal might and glory.
1408. So they spake, and Aias arrayed him in gleaming bronze.
1409. But when he had clothed about his flesh all his armour, then sped he in such wise as huge Ares goeth forth when he enters into battle amid warriors whom the son of Cronos hath brought together to contend in the fury of soul-devouring strife.
1410. Even in such wise sprang forth huge Aias, the bulwark of the Achaeans, with a smile on his grim face; and he went with long strides of his feet beneath him, brandishing his far-shadowing spear.
1411. Then were the Argives glad as they looked upon him, but upon the Trojans crept dread trembling on the limbs of every man, and Hector's own heart beat fast within his breast.
1412. Howbeit in no wise could he any more flee or shrink back into the throng of the host, seeing he had made challenge to fight.
1413. So Aias drew near, bearing his shield that was like a city wall, a shield of bronze with sevenfold bull's-hide, the which Tychius had wrought with toil, he that was far best of workers in hide, having his home in Hyle, who had made him his flashing shield of seven hides of sturdy bulls, and thereover had wrought an eighth layer of bronze.
1414. This Telamonian Aias bare before his breast, and he came and stood close by Hector, and spake threatening:
1415. Hector, now verily shalt thou know of a surety, man to man, what manner of chieftains there be likewise among the Danaans, even after Achilles, breaker of the ranks of men, the lion-hearted.
1416. Howbeit he abideth amid his beaked seafaring ships in utter wrath against Agamemnon, Atreus' son, shepherd of the host; yet are we such as to face thee, yea, full many of us.
1417. But begin thou war and battle.
1418. To him then made answer great Hector of the flashing helm: Aias, sprung from Zeus, thou son of Telamon, captain of the host, in no wise make thou trial of me as of some puny boy or a woman that knoweth not deeds of war.
1419. Nay, full well know I battles and slayings of men.
1420. I know well how to wield to right, and well how to wield to left my shield of seasoned hide, which I deem a sturdy thing to wield in fight; and I know how to charge into the mellay of chariots drawn by swift mares; and I know how in close fight to tread the measure of furious Ares.
1421. Yet am I not minded to smite thee, being such a one as thou art, by spying thee at unawares; but rather openly, if so be I may hit thee.
1422. He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled it; and he smote Aias' dread shield of sevenfold bull's - hide upon the outermost bronze, the eighth layer that was thereon.
1423. Through six folds shore the stubborn bronze, but in the seventh hide it was stayed.
1424. Then in turn Zeus-born Aias hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon the son of Priam's shield, that was well balanced upon every side.
1425. Through the bright shield went the mighty spear, and through the corselet, richly dight, did it force its way; and straight on beside his flank the spear shore through his tunic; but he bent aside, and escaped black fate.
1426. Then the twain both at one moment drew forth with their hands their long spears, and fell to, in semblance like ravening lions or wild boars, whose is no weakling strength.
1427. Then the son of Priam smote full upon the shield of Aias with a thrust of his spear, howbeit the bronze brake not through, for its point was turned; but Aias leapt upon him and pierced his buckler, and clean through went the spear and made him reel in his onset; even to his neck it made its way, and gashed it, and the dark blood welled up.
1428. Yet not even so did Hector of the flashing - helm cease from fight, but giving ground he seized with stout hand a stone that lay upon the plain, black and jagged and great; therewith he smote Aias' dread shield of sevenfold bull's - hide full upon the boss; and the bronze rang about it.
1429. Then Aias in turn lifted on high a far greater stone, and swung and hurled it, putting into the cast measureless strength; and he burst the buckler inwards with the cast of the rock that was like unto a mill - stone, and beat down Hector's knees; so he stretched upon his back, gathered together under his shield; howbeit Apollo straightway raised him up.
1430. And now had they been smiting with their swords in close fight, but that the heralds, messengers of Zeus and men, came, one from the Trojans and one from the brazen - coated Achaeans, even Talthybius and Idaeus, men of prudence both.
1431. Between the two they held forth their staves, and the herald Idaeus, skilled in prudent counsel, spake, saying:
1432. Fight ye no more, dear sons, neither do battle; both ye twain are loved of Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, and both are spearmen; that verily know we all.
1433. Moreover night is now upon us, and it is well to yield obedience to night's behest.
1434. Then in answer to him spake Telamonian Aias: Idaeus, bid ye Hector speak these words, for it was he who of himself challenged to combat all our best.
1435. Let him be first and I verily will hearken even as he shall say.
1436. Then spake unto him great Hector of the flashing helm: Aias, seeing God gave thee stature and might, aye, and wisdom, and with thy spear thou art pre-eminent above all the Achaeans, let us now cease from battle and strife for this day; hereafter shall we fight again until God judge between us, and give victory to one side or the other.
1437. Howbeit night is now upon us, and it is well to yield obedience to night's behest, that thou mayest make glad all the Achaeans beside their ships, and most of all the kinsfolk and comrades that are thine; and I throughout the great city of king Priam shall make glad the Trojan men and Trojan women with trailing robes, who because of me will enter the gathering of the gods with thanksgivings.
1438. But come, let us both give each to the other glorious gifts, to the end that many a one of Achaeans and Trojans alike may thus say: ‘ The twain verily fought in rivalry of soul -devouring strife, but thereafter made them a compact and were parted in friendship.’
1439. When he had thus said, he brought and gave him his silver - studded sword with its scabbard and well - cut baldric; and Aias gave his belt bright with scarlet.
1440. So they parted, and one went his way to the host of the Achaeans and the other betook him to the throng of the Trojans.
1441. And these waxed glad when they saw Hector coming to join them alive and whole, escaped from the fury of Aias and his invincible hands; and they brought him to the city scarce deeming that he was safe.
1442. And Aias on his part was led of the well - greaved Achaeans unto goodly Agamemnon, filled with joy of his victory.
1443. And when they were now come to the huts of the son of Atreus, then did the king of men, Agamemnon slay there a bull, a male of five years, for the son of Cronos, supreme in might.
1444. This they flayed and dressed, and cut up all the limbs.
1445. Then they sliced these cunningly, and spitted them and roasted them carefully and drew all off the spits.
1446. But when they had ceased from their labour and had made ready the meal, they feasted, nor did their hearts lack aught of the equal feast.
1447. And unto Aias for his honour was the long chine given by the warrior son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon.
1448. But when they had put from them the desire of food and drink, first of all the old man began to weave the web of counsel for them, even Nestor, whose rede had of old ever seemed the best.
1449. He with good intent addressed their gathering and spake among them: Son of Atreus and ye other princes of the hosts of Achaea, lo, full many long - haired Achaeans are dead, whose dark blood keen Ares hath now spilt about fair - flowing Scamander, and their souls have gone down to the house of Hades; therefore were it well that thou make the battle of the Achaeans to cease at daybreak, and we will gather to hale hither on carts the corpses with oxen and mules; and we will burn them a little way from the ships that each man may bear their bones home to their children, whenso we return again to our native land.
1450. And about the pyre let us heap a single barrow, rearing it from the plain for all alike, and thereby build with speed a lofty wall, a defence for our ships and for ourselves.
1451. And therein let us build gates close - fastening, that through them may be a way for the driving of chariots; and without let us dig a deep ditch hard by, which shall intervene and keep back chariots and footmen, lest ever the battle of the lordly Trojans press heavily upon us.
1452. So spake he, and all the kings assented thereto.
1453. And of the Trojans likewise was a gathering held in the citadel of Ilios, a gathering fierce and tumultuous, beside Priam's doors.
1454. Among them wise Antenor was first to speak, saying: Hearken to me, ye Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that I may speak what the heart in my breast biddeth me.
1455. Come ye now, let us give Argive Helen and the treasure with her unto the sons of Atreus to take away.
1456. Now do we fight after proving false to our oaths of faith, wherefore have I no hope that aught will issue to our profit, if we do not thus.
1457. When he had thus spoken he sate him down, and among them uprose goodly Alexander, lord of fair - haired Helen; he made answer, and spake to him winged words: Antenor, this that thou sayest is no longer to my pleasure; yea thou knowest how to devise better words than these.
1458. But if thou verily speakest this in earnest, then of a surety have the gods themselves destroyed thy wits.
1459. Howbeit I will speak amid the gathering of horse - taming Trojans and declare outright: my wife will I not give back; but the treasure that I brought from Argos to our home, all this am I minded to give, and to add thereto from mine own store.
1460. When he had thus spoken he sate him down, and among them uprose Priam, son of Dardanus, peer of the gods in counsel.
1461. He with good intent addressed their gathering, and spake among them: Hearken to me, ye Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that I may say what the heart in my breast biddeth me.
1462. For this present take ye your supper throughout the city, even as of old, and take heed to keep watch, and be wakeful every man; and at dawn let Idaeus go to the hollow ships to declare to Atreus' sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus, the word of Alexander, for whose sake strife hath been set afoot.
1463. And let him furthermore declare to them this word of wisdom, whether they are minded to cease from dolorous war till we have burned the dead; thereafter shall we fight again until God judge between us, and give victory to one side or the other.
1464. So spake he, and they readily hearkened to him, and obeyed; then they took their supper throughout the host by companies, and at dawn Idaeus went his way to the hollow ships.
1465. There he found in the place of gathering the Danaans, squires of Ares, beside the stern of Agamemnon's ship; and the loud - voiced herald took his stand in the midst and spake among them: Son of Atreus, and ye other princes of the hosts of Achaea, Priam and the other lordly Trojans bade me declare to you — if haply it be your wish and your good pleasure — the saying of Alexander, for whose sake strife hath been set afoot.
1466. The treasure that Alexander brought to Troy in his hollow ships — would that he had perished first ! — all this he is minded to give, and to add thereto from his own store; but the wedded wife of glorious Menelaus, he declares he will not give; though verily the Trojans bid him do it.
1467. Moreover they bade me declare unto you this word also, whether ye be minded to cease from dolorous war till we have burned the dead; thereafter shall we fight again until God judge between us and give victory to one side or the other.
1468. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence.
1469. But at length there spake among them Diomedes, good at the war -cry:
1470. Let no man now accept the treasure from Alexander, nay, nor Helen; known is it, even to him who hath no wit at all, that now the cords of destruction are made fast upon the Trojans.
1471. So spake he, and all the sons of the Achaeans shouted aloud, applauding the saying of Diomedes, tamer of horses.
1472. Then to Idaeus spake lord Agamemnon: Idaeus, verily of thyself thou hearest the word of the Achaeans, how they make answer to thee; and mine own pleasure is even as theirs.
1473. But as touching the dead I in no wise grudge that ye burn them; for to dead corpses should no man grudge, when once they are dead, the speedy consolation of fire.
1474. But to our oaths let Zeus be witness, the loud - thundering lord of Hera.
1475. So saying, he lifted up his staff before the face of all the gods, and Idaeus went his way back to sacred Ilios.
1476. Now they were sitting in assembly, Trojans and Dardanians alike, all gathered in one body waiting until Idaeus should come; and he came and stood in their midst and declared his message.
1477. Then they made them ready with all speed for either task, some to bring the dead, and others to seek for wood.
1478. And the Argives over against them hasted from the benched ships, some to bring the dead and others to seek for wood.
1479. The sun was now just striking on the fields, as he rose from softly - gliding, deep-flowing Oceanus, and climbed the heavens, when the two hosts met together.
1480. Then was it a hard task to know each man again; howbeit with water they washed from them the clotted blood, and lifted them upon the waggons, shedding hot tears the while.
1481. But great Priam would not suffer his folk to wail aloud; so in silence they heaped the corpses upon the pyre, their hearts sore stricken; and when they had burned them with fire they went their way to sacred Ilios.
1482. And in like manner over against them the well - greaved Achaeans heaped the corpses upon the pyre, their hearts sore stricken, and when they had burned them with fire they went their way to the hollow ships.
1483. Now when dawn was not yet, but night was still' twixt light and dark, then was there gathered about the pyre the chosen host of the Achaeans, and they made about it a single barrow, rearing it from the plain for all alike; and thereby they built a wall and a lofty rampart, a defence for their ships and for themselves.
1484. And therein they made gates, close - fastening, that through them might be a way for the driving of chariots.
1485. And without they dug a deep ditch hard by, wide and great, and therein they planted stakes.
1486. Thus were they toiling, the long - haired Achaeans; and the gods, as they sat by the side of Zeus, the lord of the lightning, marvelled at the great work of the brazen - coated Achaeans.
1487. And among them Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, was first to speak: Father Zeus, is there now anyone of mortals on the face of the boundless earth, that will any more declare to the immortals his mind and counsel?
1488. Seest thou not that now again the long - haired Achaeans have builded them a wall to defend their ships, and about it have drawn a trench, but gave not glorious hecatombs to the gods?
1489. Of a surety shall the fame thereof reach as far as the dawn spreadeth, and men will forget the wall that I and Phoebus Apollo built with toil for the warrior Laomedon.
1490. Then greatly troubled, Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, spake to him:
1491. Ah me, thou Shaker of Earth, wide of sway, what a thing thou hast said !
1492. Another of the gods might haply fear this device, whoso was feebler far than thou in hand and might; whereas thy fame shall of a surety reach as far as the dawn spreadeth.
1493. Go to now, when once the long - haired Achaeans have gone with their ships to their dear native land, then do thou burst apart the wall and sweep it all into the sea, and cover the great beach again with sand, that so the great wall of the Achaeans may be brought to naught of thee.
1494. On this wise spake they, one to the other, and the sun set, and the work of the Achaeans was accomplished; and they slaughtered oxen throughout the huts and took supper.
1495. And ships full many were at hand from Lemnos, bearing wine, sent forth by Jason's son, Euneus, whom Hypsipyle bare to Jason, shepherd of the host.
1496. And for themselves alone unto the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus, had Euneus given wine to be brought them, even a thousand measures.
1497. From these ships the long - haired Achaeans bought them wine, some for bronze, some for gleaming iron, some for hides, some for whole cattle, and some for slaves; and they made them a rich feast.
1498. So the whole night through the long - haired Achaeans feasted, and the Trojans likewise in the city, and their allies; and all night long Zeus, the counsellor, devised them evil, thundering in terrible wise.
1499. Then pale fear gat hold of them, and they let the wine flow from their cups upon the ground, neither durst any man drink until he had made a drink - offering to the son of Cronos, supreme in might.
1500. Then they laid them down, and took the gift of sleep.
1501. Now Dawn the saffron - robed was spreading over the face of all the earth, and Zeus that hurleth the thunderbolt made a gathering of the gods upon the topmost peak of many - ridged Olympus, and himself addressed their gathering; and all the gods gave ear: Hearken unto me, all ye gods and goddesses, that I may speak what the heart in my breast biddeth me.
1502. Let not any goddess nor yet any god essay this thing, to thwart my word, but do ye all alike assent thereto, that with all speed I may bring these deeds to pass.
1503. Whomsoever I shall mark minded apart from the gods to go and bear aid either to Trojans or Danaans, smitten in no seemly wise shall he come back to Olympus, or I shall take and hurl him into murky Tartarus, far, far away, where is the deepest gulf beneath the earth, the gates whereof are of iron and the threshold of bronze, as far beneath Hades as heaven is above earth: then shall ye know how far the mightiest am I of all gods.
1504. Nay, come, make trial, ye gods, that ye all may know.
1505. Make ye fast from heaven a chain of gold, and lay ye hold thereof, all ye gods and all goddesses; yet could ye not drag to earth from out of heaven Zeus the counsellor most high, not though ye laboured sore.
1506. But whenso I were minded to draw of a ready heart, then with earth itself should I draw you and with sea withal; and the rope should I thereafter bind about a peak of Olympus and all those things should hang in space.
1507. By so much am I above gods and above men.
1508. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence, marvelling at his words; for full masterfully did he address their gathering.
1509. But at length there spake among them the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene: Father of us all, thou son of Cronos, high above all lords, well know we of ourselves that thy might is unyielding, yet even so have we pity for the Danaan spearmen who now shall perish and fulfill an evil fate.
1510. Yet verily will we refrain us from battle, even as thou dost bid; howbeit counsel will we offer to the Argives which shall be for their profit, that they perish not all by reason of thy wrath.
1511. Then with a smile spake to her Zeus the cloud - gatherer:
1512. Be of good cheer, Tritogeneia, dear child.
1513. In no wise do I speak with full purpose of heart, but am minded to be kindly to thee.
1514. So saying, he let harness beneath his car his bronze - hooved horses, swift of flight, with flowing manes of gold; and with gold he clad himself about his body, and grasped the well - wrought whip of gold, and stepped upon his car and touched the horses with the lash to start them; and nothing loath the pair sped onward midway between earth and starry heaven.
1515. To Ida he fared, the many -fountained, mother of wild beasts, even to Gargarus, where is his demesne and his fragrant altar.
1516. There did the father of men and gods stay his horses, and loose them from the car, and shed thick mist upon them; and himself sat amid the mountain peaks exulting in his glory, looking upon the city of the Trojans and the ships of the Achaeans.
1517. But the long - haired Achaeans took their meal hastily throughout the huts, and as they rose up therefrom arrayed them in armour; and in like manner, the Trojans, on their side, armed themselves throughout the city; fewer they were, but even so were they eager to contend in battle through utter need, for their children's sake and their wives'.
1518. And all the gates were opened, and the host hasted forth, footmen alike and charioteers; and a great din arose.
1519. But when they were met together and come into one place, then clashed they their shields and spears, and the fury of bronze - mailed warriors; and the bossed shields closed each with each, and a great din arose.
1520. Then were heard alike the sound of groaning and the cry of triumph of the slayers and the slain, and the earth flowed with blood.
1521. Now as long as it was morn and the sacred day was waxing, so long the missiles of either side struck home, and the folk kept falling.
1522. But when the sun had reached mid heaven, then verily the Father lifted on high his golden scales, and set therein two fates of grievous death, one for the horse - taming Trojans, and one for the brazen - coated Achaeans; then he grasped the balance by the midst and raised it, and down sank the day of doom of the Achaeans.
1523. So the Achaeans' fates settled down upon the bounteous earth and those of the Trojans were raised aloft toward wide heaven.
1524. Then himself he thundered aloud from Ida, and sent a blazing flash amid the host of the Achaeans; and at sight thereof they were seized with wonder, and pale fear gat hold of all.
1525. Then had neither Idomeneus the heart to abide, nor Agamemnon, nor yet the Aiantes twain, squires of Ares; only Nestor of Gerenia abode, the warder of the Achaeans, and he nowise of his own will, but his horse was sore wounded, seeing goodly Alexander, lord of fair - haired Helen, had smitten him with an arrow upon the crown of the head where the foremost hairs of horses grow upon the skull, and where is the deadliest spot.
1526. So, stung with agony the horse leapt on high as the arrow sank into his brain, and he threw into confusion horses and car as he writhed upon the bronze.
1527. And while the old man sprang forth and with his sword was cutting away the traces, meanwhile the swift horses of Hector came on through the tumult, bearing a bold charioteer, even Hector.
1528. And now would the old man here have lost his life, had not Diomedes, good at the war-cry, been quick to see; and he shouted with a terrible shout, urging on Odysseus: Zeus -born son of Laërtes, Odysseus of many wiles, whither fleest thou with thy back turned, like a coward in the throng?
1529. Let it not be that as thou fleest some man plant his spear in thy back.
1530. Nay, hold thy ground, that we may thrust back from old Nestor this wild warrior.
1531. So spake he, howbeit the much-enduring goodly Odysseus heard him not, but hasted by to the hollow ships of the Achaeans.
1532. But the son of Tydeus, alone though he was, mingled with the foremost fighters, and took his stand before the horses of the old man, Neleus' son, and spake and addressed him with winged words:
1533. Old sir, of a surety young warriors press thee sore; whereas thy might is broken and grievous old age attends thee, and thy squire is a weakling and thy horses slow.
1534. Nay, come, mount upon my car, that thou mayest see of what sort are the horses of Tros, well skilled to course fleetly hither and thither over the plain whether in pursuit or in flight, even those that once I took from Aeneas, devisers of rout.
1535. Thy horses shall our two squires tend, but these twain shall thou and I drive straight against the horse - taming Trojans, that Hector too may know whether my spear also rageth in my hands.
1536. So spake he, and the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, failed not to hearken.
1537. So the mares of Nestor were tended by the two squires, valiant Sthenelus and Eurymedon the kindly; and the other twain mounted both upon the car of Diomedes.
1538. Nestor took in his hands the shining reins, and touched the horses with the lash, and speedily they drew nigh to Hector.
1539. Upon him then as he charged straight at them the son of Tydeus made a cast: him he missed, but his squire that drave the chariot, Eniopeus, son of Thebaeus, high of heart, even as he was holding the reins, he smote on the breast beside the nipple.
1540. So he fell from out the car, and the swift - footed horses swerved aside thereat; and there his spirit and his strength were undone.
1541. Then was the soul of Hector clouded with dread sorrow for his charioteer.
1542. Yet left he him to lie there, albeit he sorrowed for his comrade, and sought him a bold charioteer; nor did his horses twain long lack a master, for straightway he found Iphitus' son, bold Archeptolemus, and made him mount behind his swift - footed horses, and gave the reins into his hands.
1543. Then had ruin come and deeds beyond remedy been wrought, and they had been penned in Ilios like lambs, had not the father of men and gods been quick to see.
1544. He thundered terribly and let fly his white lightning - bolt, and down before the horses of Diomedes he hurled it to earth; and a terrible flame arose of burning sulphur, and the two horses, seized with terror, cowered beneath the car.
1545. Then from the hands of Nestor slipped the shining reins, and he waxed afraid at heart, and spake to Diomedes: Son of Tydeus, come now, turn thou in flight thy single - hooved horses.
1546. Seest thou not that victory from Zeus waited not on thee?
1547. Now to yon man doth Zeus, the son of Cronos, vouchsafe glory for this day; hereafter shall he grant it also to us, if so be he will.
1548. But a man may in no wise thwart the purpose of Zeus, be he never so valiant; for in sooth he is mightier far.
1549. And in answer to him spake Diomedes, good at the war cry:
1550. Yea, verily, old sir, all this hast thou spoken according to right.
1551. But herein dread grief cometh upon my heart and soul, for Hector will some day say, as he speaketh in the gathering of the Trojans: ‘ Tydeus' son, driven in flight before me, betook him to the ships.’
1552. So shall he some day boast — on that day let the wide earth gape for me.
1553. And in answer to him spake the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia:
1554. Ah me, thou son of wise - hearted Tydeus, what a thing hast thou said !
1555. For though Hector shall call thee coward and weakling, yet will not the Trojans or the Dardanians hearken to him, nor the wives of the great-souled Trojans, bearers of the shield, they whose lusty husbands thou hast hurled in the dust.
1556. So spake he, and turned in flight his single - hooved horses, back through the tumult; and the Trojans and Hector with wondrous shouting poured forth upon them their missiles fraught with groanings.
1557. Over him then shouted aloud great Hector of the flashing helm: Son of Tydeus, above all others were the Danaans with swift steeds wont to honour thee with a seat of honour and meats and full cups, but now will they scorn thee; thou art, it appeareth, no better than a woman.
1558. Begone, cowardly puppet; since through no flinching of mine shalt thou mount upon our walls, and carry away our women in thy ships; ere that will I deal thee thy doom.
1559. So spake he, and the son of Tydeus was divided in counsel whether he should not wheel his horses and fight him face to face.
1560. Thrice he wavered in heart and soul and thrice from the mountains of Ida Zeus the counsellor thundered, giving to the Trojans a sign and victory to turn the tide of battle.
1561. And Hector shouted aloud and called to the Trojans: Ye Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians, that fight in close combat, be men, my friends, and bethink you of furious valour.
1562. I perceive that of a ready heart the son of Cronos hath given unto me victory and great glory, and to the Danaans woe.
1563. Fools they are, that contrived forsooth these walls, weak and of none account; these shall not withhold our might, and our horses shall lightly leap over the digged ditch.
1564. But when I be at length come amid the hollow ships, then see ye that consuming fire be not forgotten, that with fire I may burn the ships and furthermore slay the men, even the Argives beside their ships, distraught by reason of the smoke.
1565. So saying he shouted to his horses, and said: Xanthus, and thou Podargus, and Aethon, and goodly Lampus, now pay me back your tending wherewith in abundance Andromache, daughter of great-hearted Eëtion, set before you honey - hearted wheat, and mingled wine for you to drink when your souls bade you, sooner than for me, that avow me to be her stalwart husband.
1566. Nay, haste ye in pursuit, that we may take the shield of Nestor, the fame whereof now reacheth unto heaven, that it is all of gold, the rods alike and the shield itself; and may take moreover from the shoulders of horse - taming Diomedes his breastplate richly - dight, which Hephaestus wrought with toil.
1567. Could we but take these twain, then might I hope to make the Achaeans this very night embark upon their swift ships.
1568. So spake he vauntingly, and queenly Hera had indignation thereat; she shook herself on her throne and made high Olympus to quake, and to the mighty god Poseidon she spake, saying:
1569. Ah me, thou Shaker of Earth, wide of sway, not even hath the heart in thy breast pity of the Danaans that are perishing.
1570. Yet in thine honour do they bring to Helice and Aegae offerings many and gracious and hitherto thou didst wish them victory.
1571. For did we but will, all we that are aiders of the Danaans, to drive back the Trojans and to withhold Zeus whose voice is borne afar, then, in vexation of spirit, would he sit alone there upon Ida.
1572. Then, his heart sore troubled, the lord, the Shaker of Earth, spake to her: Hera, reckless in speech, what a word hast thou spoken !
1573. It is not I that were fain to see us all at strife with Zeus, son of Cronos, for he verily is mightier far.
1574. On this wise spake they, one to the other; and now was all the space that the moat of the wall enclosed on the side of the ships filled alike with chariots and shield - bearing men huddled together: and huddled they were by Hector, Priam's son, the peer of swift Ares, now that Zeus vouchsafed him glory.
1575. And now would he have burned the shapely ships with blazing fire, had not queenly Hera put it in Agamemnon's mind himself to bestir him, and speedily rouse on the Achaeans.
1576. So he went his way along the huts and ships of the Achaeans, bearing his great purple cloak in his stout hand, and took his stand by Odysseus' black ship, huge of hull, that was in the midst so that a shout could reach to either end, both to the huts of Aias, son of Telamon, and to those of Achilles; for these had drawn up their shapely ships at the furthermost ends, trusting in their valour and in the strength of their hands.
1577. There uttered he a piercing shout, calling aloud to the Danaans: Fie, ye Argives, base things of shame fair in semblance only.
1578. Whither are gone our boastings, when forsooth we declared that we were bravest, the boasts that when ye were in Lemnos ye uttered vaingloriously as ye ate abundant flesh of straight - horned kine and drank bowls brim full of wine, saying that each man would stand to face in battle an hundred, aye, two hundred Trojans !
1579. whereas now can we match not even one, this Hector, that soon will burn our ships with blazing fire.
1580. Father Zeus, was there ever ere now one among mighty kings whose soul thou didst blind with blindness such as this, and rob him of great glory?
1581. Yet of a surety do I deem that never in my benched ship did I pass by fair altar of thine on my ill-starred way hither, but upon all I burned the fat and the thighs of bulls, in my eagerness to lay waste well - walled Troy.
1582. Nay, Zeus, this desire fulfill thou me: ourselves at least do thou suffer to flee and escape, and permit not the Achaeans thus to be vanquished by the Trojans.
1583. So spake he, and the Father had pity on him as he wept, and vouchsafed him that his folk should be saved and not perish.
1584. Forthwith he sent an eagle, surest of omens among winged birds, holding in his talons a fawn, the young of a swift hind.
1585. Beside the fair altar of Zeus he let fall the fawn, even where the Achaeans were wont to offer sacrifice to Zeus from whom all omens come.
1586. So they, when they saw that it was from Zeus that the bird was come, leapt the more upon the Trojans and bethought them of battle.
1587. Then might no man of the Danaans, for all they were so many, vaunt that he before the son of Tydeus guided his swift horses to drive them forth across the trench and to fight man to man; nay he was first by far to slay a mailed warrior of the Trojans, even Agelaus, Phradraon's son.
1588. He in sooth had turned his horses to flee, but as he wheeled about Diomedes fixed his spear in his back between the shoulders, and drave it through his breast; so he fell from out the car, and upon him his armour clanged.
1589. And after him came the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus, and after them the Aiantes, clothed in furious valour, and after them Idomeneus and Idomeneus' comrade, Meriones, peer of Enyalius, slayer of men, and after them Eurypylus, the glorious son of Euaemon; and Teucer came as the ninth, stretching his back - bent bow, and took his stand beneath the shield of Aias, son of Telamon.
1590. Then would Aias move his shield aside from over him, and the warrior would spy his chance; and when he had shot his bolt and had smitten one in the throng, then would that man fall where he was and give up his life, and Teucer would hie him back, and as a child beneath his mother, so betake him for shelter to Aias; and Aias would ever hide him with his shining shield.
1591. Whom first then of the Trojans did peerless Teucer slay?
1592. Orsilochus first and Ormenus and Ophelestes and Daetor and Chromius and godlike Lycophontes and Amopaon, Polyaemon's son, and Melanippus.
1593. All these, one after another, he brought down to the bounteous earth.
1594. And at sight of him Agamemnon, king of men, waxed glad, as with his mighty bow he made havoc of the battalions of the Trojans; and he came and stood by his side and spake to him, saying: Teucer, beloved, son of Telamon, captain of hosts, shoot on in this wise, if so be thou mayest prove a light of deliverance to the Danaans and a glory to thy father Telamon, who reared thee when thou wast a babe, and for all thou wast a bastard cherished thee in his own house; him, far away though he be, do thou bring to honour.
1595. Moreover, I will declare to thee as it verily shall be brought to pass.
1596. If Zeus that beareth the aegis, and Athene shall vouchsafe me to lay waste the well - built citadel of Ilios, in thy hand first after mine own self will I place a meed of honour, either a tripod or two horses with their car, or a woman that shall go up into thy bed.
1597. Then in answer to him spake peerless Teucer: Most glorious son of Atreus, why urgest thou me on, that of myself am eager?
1598. Verily I forbear not so far as might is in me, but from the time when we drave them toward Ilios, even from that moment I lie in wait with my bow and slay the men.
1599. Eight long - barbed arrows have I now let fly, and all are lodged in the flesh of youths swift in battle; only this mad dog can I not smite.
1600. He spake, and shot another arrow from the string straight against Hector; and his heart was fain to smite him.
1601. Howbeit him he missed, but peerless Gorgythion he smote in the breast with his arrow, Priam's valiant son, that a mother wedded from Aesyme had born, even fair Castianeira, in form like to the goddesses.
1602. And he bowed his head to one side like a poppy that in a garden is laden with its fruit and the rains of spring; so bowed he to one side his head, laden with his helmet.
1603. And Teucer shot another arrow from the string straight against Hector, and his heart was fain to smite him.
1604. Howbeit he missed him once again, for Apollo made his dart to swerve, but Archeptolemus, the bold charioteer of Hector, as he hasted into battle he smote on the breast beside the nipple.
1605. So he fell from out the car, and the swift - footed horses swerved aside thereat; and there his spirit and his strength were undone.
1606. Then was the soul of Hector clouded with dread sorrow for his charioteer.
1607. Yet left he him to lie there, though he sorrowed for his comrade, and bade Cebriones, his own brother, that was nigh at hand, take the reins of the horses; and he heard and failed not to hearken.
1608. And himself Hector leapt to the ground from his gleaming car crying a terrible cry, and seizing a stone in his hand made right at Teucer, and his heart bade him smite him.
1609. Now Teucer had drawn forth from the quiver a bitter arrow, and laid it upon the string, but even as he was drawing it back Hector of the flashing helm smote him beside the shoulder where the collar - bone parts the neck and the breast, where is the deadliest spot; even there as he aimed eagerly against him he smote him with the jagged stone, and he brake the bow-string; but his hand grew numb at the wrist, and he sank upon his knees and thus abode, and the bow fell from his hand.
1610. Howbeit Aias was not unmindful of his brother's fall, but ran and bestrode him and flung before him his shield as a cover.
1611. Then two trusty comrades stooped beneath him, even Mecisteus, son of Echius, and goodly Alastor, and bare him, groaning heavily, to the hollow ships.
1612. Then once again the Olympian aroused might in the hearts of the Trojans; and they thrust the Achaeans straight toward the deep ditch; and amid the foremost went Hector exulting in his might.
1613. And even as a hound pursueth with swift feet after a wild boar or a lion, and snatcheth at him from behind either at flank or buttock, and watcheth for him as he wheeleth; even so Hector pressed upon the long - haired Achaeans, ever slaying the hindmost; and they were driven in rout.
1614. But when in their flight they had passed through stakes and trench, and many had been vanquished beneath the hands of the Trojans, then beside their ships they halted and abode, calling one upon the other, and lifting up their hands to all the gods they made fervent prayer each man of them.
1615. But Hector wheeled this way and that his fair - maned horses, and his eyes were as the eyes of the Gorgon or of Ares, bane of mortals.
1616. Now at sight of them the goddess, white - armed Hera, had pity; and forthwith spake winged words to Athene:
1617. Out upon it, thou child of Zeus that beareth the aegis, shall not we twain any more take thought of the Danaans that are perishing, even for this last time?
1618. Now will they fill up the measure of evil doom and perish before the onset of one single man, even of Hector, Priam's son, who now rageth past all bearing, and lo, hath wrought evils manifold.
1619. Then spake unto her the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene: Yea, verily, fain were I that this fellow lose strength and life, slain beneath the hands of the Argives in his own native land; howbeit mine own father rageth with evil mind, cruel that he is, ever froward, a thwarter of my purposes; neither hath he any memory of this, that full often I saved his son when he was fordone by reason of Eurystheus' tasks.
1620. For verily he would make lament toward heaven and from heaven would Zeus send me forth to succour him.
1621. Had I but known all this in wisdom of my heart when Eurystheus sent him forth to the house of Hades the Warder, to bring from out of Erebus the hound of loathed Hades, then had he not escaped the sheer - falling waters of Styx.
1622. Howbeit now Zeus hateth me, and hath brought to fulfillment the counsels of Thetis, that kissed his knees and with her hand clasped his chin, beseeching him to show honour to Achilles, sacker of cities.
1623. Verily the day shall come when he shall again call me his flashing - eyed darling.
1624. But now make thou ready for us twain our single - hooved horses, the while I enter into the palace of Zeus, that beareth the aegis, and array me in armour for battle, to the end that I may see whether Priam's son, Hector of the flashing helm, will rejoice when we twain appear to view along the dykes of battle.
1625. Nay of a surety many a one of the Trojans shall glut the dogs and birds with his fat and flesh, when he is fallen at the ships of the Achaeans.
1626. So spake she, and the goddess, white - armed Hera, failed not to hearken.
1627. She then went to and fro harnessing the horses of golden frontlets, even Hera, the queenly goddess, daughter of great Cronos; but Athene, daughter of Zeus that beareth the aegis, let fall upon her father's floor her soft robe, richly broidered, that herself had wrought and her hands had fashioned, and put on her the tunic of Zeus the cloud - gatherer, and arrayed her in armour for tearful war.
1628. Then she stepped upon the flaming car and grasped her spear, heavy and huge and strong, wherewith she vanquisheth the ranks of men, of warriors with whom she is wroth, she the daughter of the mighty sire.
1629. And Hera swiftly touched the horses with the lash, and self - bidden groaned upon their hinges the gates of heaven, which the Hours had in their keeping, to whom are entrusted great heaven and Olympus, whether to throw open the thick cloud or shut it to.
1630. There through the gate they drave their horses patient of the goad.
1631. But when father Zeus saw them from Ida he waxed wondrous wroth, and sent forth golden - winged Iris to bear a message:
1632. Up, go, swift Iris; turn them back and suffer them not to come face to face with me, seeing it will be in no happy wise that we shall join in combat.
1633. For thus will I speak and verily this thing shall be brought to pass.
1634. I will maim their swift horses beneath the chariot, and themselves will I hurl from out the car, and will break in pieces the chariot; nor in the space of ten circling years shall they heal them of the wounds wherewith the thunderbolt shall smite them; that she of the flashing eyes may know what it is to strive against her own father.
1635. But against Hera have I not so great indignation nor wrath, seeing she is ever wont to thwart me in whatsoe'er I have decreed.
1636. So spake he, and storm - footed Iris hasted to bear his message, and went forth from the mountains of Ida to high Olympus.
1637. And even at the entering - in of the gate of many - folded Olympus she met them and stayed them, and declared to them the saying of Zeus:
1638. Whither are ye twain hastening?
1639. Why is it that the hearts are mad within your breasts?
1640. The son of Cronos suffereth not that ye give succour to the Argives.
1641. For on this wise he threateneth, even as he will bring it to pass: he will maim your swift horses beneath your chariot, and yourselves will he hurl from out the car, and will break in pieces the chariot; nor in the space of ten circling years shall ye heal you of the wounds wherewith the thunderbolt shall smite you; that thou mayest know, thou of the flashing eyes, what it is to strive against thine own father.
1642. But against Hera hath he not so great indignation nor wrath, seeing she is ever wont to thwart him in whatsoe'er he hath decreed.
1643. But most dread art thou, thou bold and shameless thing, if in good sooth thou wilt dare to raise thy mighty spear against Zeus.
1644. When she had thus spoken swift - footed Iris departed; but Hera spake to Athene, saying:
1645. Out upon it, thou child of Zeus that beareth the aegis !
1646. I verily will no more suffer that we twain seek to wage war against Zeus for mortals' sake.
1647. Of them let one perish and another live, even as it may befall; and for him, let him take his own counsel in his heart and judge between Trojans and Danaans, as is meet.
1648. So spake she, and turned back her single - hooved horses.
1649. Then the Hours unyoked for them their fair - maned horses, and tethered them at their ambrosial mangers, and leaned the chariot against the bright entrance wall; and the goddesses sate them down upon golden thrones amid the other gods, with sore grief at heart.
1650. But father Zeus drave from Ida his well - wheeled chariot and his horses unto Olympus, and came to the session of the gods.
1651. And for him the famed Shaker of Earth both unyoked his horses and set the car upon a stand, and spread thereover a cloth; and Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, himself sat upon his throne of gold, and beneath his feet great Olympus quaked.
1652. Only Athene and Hera sat apart from Zeus, and spake no word to him nor made question.
1653. But he knew in his heart and spake, saying:
1654. Why are ye thus grieved, Athene and Hera?
1655. Surely ye twain be not grown weary with making havoc of the Trojans in battle, wherein men win glory, seeing ye cherish against them wondrous hate !
1656. Come what will, seeing I have such might and hands irresistible, all the gods that are in Olympus could not turn me; and for you twain, trembling gat hold of your glorious limbs or ever ye had sight of war and the grim deeds of war.
1657. For thus will I speak, and verily this thing had been brought to pass: not upon your car, once ye were smitten by the thunderbolt, would ye have fared back to Olympus, where is the abode of the immortals.
1658. So spake he, and thereat murmured Athene and Hera, that sat by his side and were devising ills for the Trojans.
1659. Athene verily held her peace and said naught, wroth though she was with father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold of her; howbeit Hera's breast contained not her anger, but she spake to him, saying:
1660. Most dread son of Cronos, what a word hast thou said !
1661. Well know we of ourselves that thine is no weakling strength; yet even so have we pity for the Danaan spearmen who now shall perish and fulfill an evil fate.
1662. Yet verily will we refrain us from battle, if so thou biddest; howbeit counsel will we offer to the Argives which shall be for their profit, that they perish not all by reason of thy wrath.
1663. Then in answer spake to her Zeus the cloud - gatherer:
1664. At dawn shalt thou behold, if so be thou wilt, O ox-eyed, queenly Hera, the most mighty son of Cronos making yet more grievous havoc of the great host of Argive spearmen; for dread Hector shall not refrain him from battle until the swift - footed son of Peleus be uprisen beside his ships on the day when at the sterns of the ships they shall be fighting in grimmest stress about Patroclus fallen; for thus it is ordained of heaven.
1665. But of thee I reck not in thine anger, no, not though thou shouldst go to the nethermost bounds of earth and sea, where abide Iapetus and Cronos, and have joy neither in the rays of Helios Hyperion nor in any breeze, but deep Tartarus is round about them.
1666. Though thou shouldst fare even thither in thy wanderings, yet reck I not of thy wrath, seeing there is naught more shameless than thou.
1667. So said he; howbeit white - armed Hera spake no word in answer.
1668. Then into Oceanus fell the bright light of the sun drawing black night over the face of the earth, the giver of grain.
1669. Sorely against the will of the Trojans sank the daylight, but over the Achaeans welcome, aye, thrice - prayed - for, came the darkness of night.
1670. Then did glorious Hector make a gathering of the Trojans, leading them apart from the ships beside the eddying river in an open space, where the ground shewed clear of dead.
1671. Forth from their chariots they stepped upon the ground, to hearken to the word that Hector dear to Zeus spake among them.
1672. In his hand he held a spear of eleven cubits, and before him blazed the spear-point of bronze, around which ran a ring of gold.
1673. Thereon he leaned, and spake his word among the Trojans: Hearken to me, ye Trojans and Dardanians and allies: I deemed but now to make havoc of the ships and all the Achaeans, and so return back again to windy Ilios; but darkness came on ere that might be, the which above all else hath now saved the Argives and their ships upon the beach of the sea.
1674. So then for this present let us yield to black night and make ready our supper; loose ye from the cars your fair - maned horses, and cast fodder before them; and from the city bring ye oxen and goodly sheep with speed, and get you honey - hearted wine and bread from your houses, and furthermore gather abundant wood, that all night long until early dawn we may burn fires full many and the gleam thereof may reach to heaven, lest haply even by night the long - haired Achaeans make haste to take flight over the broad back of the sea.
1675. Nay, verily, not without a struggle let them board their ships neither at their ease; but see ye that many a one of them has a missile to brood over even at home, being smitten either with an arrow or sharp - pointed spear as he leapt upon his ship; that so others may dread to bring tearful war against the horse - taming Trojans.
1676. And let heralds, dear to Zeus, make proclamation throughout the city that stripling boys and old men of hoary temples gather them round the city upon the battlement builded of the gods; and for the women folk, let them build each one a great fire in her halls; and let a diligent watch be kept, lest an ambush enter the city while the host is afield.
1677. Thus be it, great -hearted Trojans, even as I proclaim; of counsel, good and sound for this present, be this enough; but more will I proclaim at dawn amid the horse - taming Trojans.
1678. I pray in high hope to Zeus and the other gods to drive out from hence these dogs borne by the fates, whom the fates bare on their black ships.
1679. Howbeit for the night will we guard our own selves, but in the morning at the coming of dawn arrayed in our armour let us arouse sharp battle at the hollow ships.
1680. I shall know whether the son of Tydeus, mighty Diomedes, will thrust me back from the ships to the wall, or whether I shall slay him with the bronze and bear off his bloody spoils.
1681. Tomorrow shall he come to know his valour, whether he can abide the on - coming of my spear.
1682. Nay, amid the foremost, methinks, shall he lie smitten with a spear-thrust, and full many of his comrades round about him at the rising of to -morrow's sun.
1683. I would that mine own self I might be immortal and ageless all my days, and that I might be honoured even as Athene and Apollo, so surely as now this day bringeth evil upon the Argives.
1684. So Hector addressed their gathering, and thereat the Trojans shouted aloud.
1685. Their sweating horses they loosed from beneath the yoke, and tethered them with thongs, each man beside his own chariot; and from the city they brought oxen and goodly sheep with speed, and got them honey - hearted wine and bread from their houses, and furthermore gathered abundant wood; and to the immortals they offered hecatombs that bring fulfillment.
1686. And from the plain the winds bore the savour up into heaven — a sweet savour, but thereof the blessed gods partook not, neither were minded thereto; for utterly hated of them was sacred Ilios, and Priam, and the people of Priam with goodly spear of ash.
1687. These then with high hearts abode the whole night through along the dykes of war, and their fires burned in multitudes.
1688. Even as in heaven about the gleaming moon the stars shine clear, when the air is windless, and forth to view appear all mountain peaks and high headlands and glades, and from heaven breaketh open the infinite air, and all stars are seen, and the shepherd joyeth in his heart; even in such multitudes between the ships and the streams of Xanthus shone the fires that the Trojans kindled before the face of Ilios.
1689. A thousand fires were burning in the plain and by each sat fifty men in the glow of the blazing fire.
1690. And their horses, eating of white barley and spelt, stood beside the cars and waited for fair - throned Dawn.
1691. Thus kept the Trojans watch, but the Achaeans were holden of wondrous Panic, the handmaid of numbing fear and with grief intolerable were all the noblest stricken.
1692. Even as two winds stir up the teeming deep, the North Wind and the West Wind that blow from Thrace, coming suddenly, and forthwith the dark wave reareth itself in crests and casteth much tangle out along the sea; even so were the hearts of the Achaeans rent within their breasts.
1693. But the son of Atreus, stricken to the heart with sore grief, went this way and that, bidding the clear-voiced heralds summon every man by name to the place of gathering, but not to shout aloud; and himself he toiled amid the foremost.
1694. So they sat in the place of gathering, sore troubled, and Agamemnon stood up weeping even as a fountain of dark water that down over the face of a beetling cliff poureth its dusky stream; even so with deep groaning spake he amid the Argives, saying:
1695. My friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, great Zeus, son of Cronos, hath ensnared me in grievous blindness of heart, cruel god !
1696. seeing that of old he promised me, and bowed his head thereto, that not until I had sacked well - walled Ilios should I get me home; but now hath he planned cruel deceit, and biddeth me return inglorious to Argos, when I have lost much people.
1697. So, I ween, must be the good pleasure of Zeus supreme in might, who hath laid low the heads of many cities, yea, and shall lay low; for his power is above all.
1698. Nay, come, even as I shall bid let us all obey: let us flee with our ships to our dear native land; for no more is there hope that we shall take broad - wayed Troy.
1699. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence.
1700. Long time were they silent in their grief, the sons of the Achaeans, but at length there spake among them Diomedes, good at the war -cry: Son of Atreus, with thee first will I contend in thy folly, where it is meet, O king, even in the place of gathering: and be not thou anywise wroth thereat.
1701. My valour didst thou revile at the first amid the Danaans, and saidst that I was no man of war but a weakling; and all this know the Achaeans both young and old.
1702. But as for thee, the son of crooked - counselling Cronos hath endowed thee in divided wise: with the sceptre hath he granted thee to be honoured above all, but valour he gave thee not, wherein is the greatest might.
1703. Strange king, dost thou indeed deem that the sons of the Achaeans are thus unwarlike and weaklings as thou sayest?
1704. Nay, if thine own heart is eager to return, get thee gone; before thee lies the way, and thy ships stand beside the sea, all the many ships that followed thee from Mycenae.
1705. Howbeit the other long - haired Achaeans will abide here until we have laid waste Troy.
1706. Nay, let them also flee in their ships to their dear native land; yet will we twain, Sthenelus and I, fight on, until we win the goal of Ilios; for with the aid of heaven are we come.
1707. So spake he, and all the sons of the Achaeans shouted aloud, applauding the word of Diomedes, tamer of horses.
1708. Then uprose and spake among them the horseman Nestor: Son of Tydeus, above all men art thou mighty in battle, and in council art the best amid all those of thine own age.
1709. Not one of all the Achaeans will make light of what thou sayest neither gainsay it; yet hast thou not reached a final end of words.
1710. Moreover, thou art in sooth but young, thou mightest e'en be my son, my youngest born; yet thou givest prudent counsel to the princes of the Argives, seeing thou speakest according to right.
1711. But come, I that avow me to be older than thou will speak forth and will declare the whole; neither shall any man scorn my words, no, not even lord Agamemnon.
1712. A clanless, lawless, hearthless man is he that loveth dread strife among his own folk.
1713. Howbeit for this present let us yield to black night and make ready our supper; and let sentinels post themselves severally along the digged ditch without the wall.
1714. To the young men give I this charge; but thereafter do thou, son of Atreus, take the lead, for thou art most kingly.
1715. Make thou a feast for the elders; this were but right and seemly for thee.
1716. Full are thy huts of wine that the ships of the Achaeans bring thee each day from Thrace, over the wide sea; all manner of entertainment hast thou at hand, seeing thou art king over many.
1717. And when many are gathered together thou shalt follow him whoso shall devise the wisest counsel.
1718. And sore need have all the Achaeans of counsel both good and prudent, seeing that foemen hard by the ships are kindling their many watchfires; what man could rejoice thereat?
1719. This night shall either bring to ruin or save our host.
1720. So spake he, and they readily hearkened to him and obeyed.
1721. Forth hasted the sentinels in their harness around Nestor's son Thrasymedes, shepherd of the host, and Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of Ares, and Meriones and Aphareus and Deïpyrus, and the son of Creon, goodly Lycomedes.
1722. Seven were the captains of the sentinels, and with each fared an hundred youths bearing long spears in their hands; then they went and sate them down midway betwixt trench and wall; and there they kindled a fire and made ready each man his meal.
1723. But the son of Atreus led the counsellors of the Achaeans all together to his hut, and set before them a feast to satisfy the heart.
1724. So they put forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before them.
1725. But when they had put from them the desire of food and drink, first of all the old man began to weave the web of counsel for them, even Nestor, whose rede had of old ever seemed the best.
1726. He with good intent addressed their gathering and spake among them: Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, with thee will I begin and with thee make an end, for that thou art king over many hosts, and to thee Zeus hath vouchsafed the sceptre and judgements, that thou mayest take counsel for thy people.
1727. Therefore it beseemeth thee above all others both to speak and to hearken, and to fulfilll also for another whatsoever his heart may bid him speak for our profit; for on thee will depend whatsoever any man may begin.
1728. So will I speak what seemeth to me to be best.
1729. No man beside shall devise a better thought than this I have in mind from old even until now, even since the day when thou, O king sprung from Zeus, didst take from the hut of the angry Achilles the damsel Briseïs and go thy way — in no wise according to our will.
1730. Nay, for I, mine own self, urgently sought to dissuade thee; but thou didst yield to thy lordly spirit, and upon a man most mighty, whom the very immortals honoured, didst thou put dishonour; for thou tookest away and keepest his prize.
1731. Howbeit let us still even now take thought how we may make amends, and persuade him with kindly gifts and with gentle words.
1732. To him then spake in answer the king of men, Agamemnon:
1733. Old sir, in no false wise hast thou recounted the tale of my blind folly.
1734. Blind I was, myself I deny it not.
1735. Of the worth of many hosts is the man whom Zeus loveth in his heart, even as now he honoureth this man and destroyeth the host of the Achaeans.
1736. Yet seeing I was blind, and yielded to my miserable passion, I am minded to make amends and to give requital past counting.
1737. In the midst of you all let me name the glorious gifts; seven tripods that the fire hath not touched, and ten talents of gold and twenty gleaming cauldrons, and twelve strong horses, winners in the race, that have won prizes by their fleetness.
1738. Not without booty were a man, nor unpossessed of precious gold, whoso had wealth as great as the prizes my single - hooved steeds have won me.
1739. And I will give seven women skilled in goodly handiwork, women of Lesbos, whom on the day when himself took well - built Lesbos I chose me from out the spoil, and that in beauty surpass all women folk.
1740. These will I give him, and amid them shall be she that then I took away, the daughter of Briseus; and I will furthermore swear a great oath that never went I up into her bed neither had dalliance with her as is the appointed way of mankind, even of men and women.
1741. All these things shall be ready to his hand forthwith; and if hereafter it so be the gods grant us to lay waste the great city of Priam, let him then enter in, what time we Achaeans be dividing the spoil, and heap up his ship with store of gold and bronze, and himself choose twenty Trojan women that be fairest after Argive Helen.
1742. And if we return to Achaean Argos, the richest of lands, he shall be my son, and I will honour him even as Orestes that is reared in all abundance, my son well - beloved.
1743. Three daughters have I in my well - builded hall, Chrysothemis, and Laodice, and Iphianassa; of these let him lead to the house of Peleus which one he will, without gifts of wooing, and I will furthermore give a dower full rich, such as no man ever yet gave with his daughter.
1744. And seven well - peopled cities will I give him, Cardamyle Enope, and grassy Hire, and sacred Pherae and Antheia with deep meadows, and fair Aepeia and vine - clad Pedasus.
1745. All are nigh to the sea, on the uttermost border of sandy Pylos, and in them dwell men rich in flocks and rich in kine, men that shall honour him with gifts as though he were a god, and beneath his sceptre shall bring his ordinances to prosperous fulfillment.
1746. All this will I bring to pass for him, if he but cease from his wrath.
1747. Let him yield —
1748. Hades, I ween, is not to be soothed, neither overcome, wherefore he is most hated by mortals of all gods.
1749. And let him submit himself unto me, seeing I am more kingly, and avow me his elder in years.
1750. Then made answer the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia: Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, the gifts that thou offerest the prince Achilles may no man any more condemn.
1751. Come, therefore, let us send forth chosen men to go forthwith to the hut of Peleus' son, Achilles.
1752. Nay, rather, whomsoever I shall choose, let them consent.
1753. First of all let Phoenix, dear to Zeus, lead the way, and after him great Aias and goodly Odysseus; and of the heralds let Odius and Eurybates attend them.
1754. And now bring ye water for our hands, and bid keep holy silence, that we may make prayer unto Zeus, son of Cronos, if so be he will have compassion upon us.
1755. So said he and the words that he spake were pleasing unto all.
1756. Then heralds poured water over their hands, and youths filled the bowls brim full of drink, and served out to all, pouring first drops for libation into the cups.
1757. But when they had made libation and had drunk to their hearts' content, they went forth from the hut of Agamemnon, son of Atreus.
1758. And the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, laid straight command upon them with many a glance at each, and chiefly upon Odysseus, that they should make essay to persuade the peerless son of Peleus.
1759. So the twain went their way along the shore of the loud - resounding sea, with many an instant prayer to the god that holdeth the earth and shaketh it, that they might easily persuade the great heart of the son of Aeacus.
1760. And they came to the huts and the ships of the Myrmidons, and found him delighting his soul with a clear - toned lyre, fair and richly wrought, whereon was a bridge of silver; this had he taken from the spoil when he laid waste the city of Eëtion.
1761. Therewith was he delighting his soul, and he sang of the glorious deeds of warriors; and Patroclus alone sat over against him in silence, waiting until Aeacus' son should cease from singing.
1762. But the twain came forward and goodly Odysseus led the way, and they took their stand before his face; and Achilles leapt up in amazement with the lyre in his hand, and left the seat whereon he sat; and in like manner Patroclus when he beheld the men uprose.
1763. Then swift - footed Achilles greeted the two and spake, saying: Welcome, verily ye be friends that are come — sore must the need be — ye that even in mine anger are to me the dearest of the Achaeans.
1764. So saying, goodly Achilles led them in and made them sit on couches and rugs of purple; and forthwith he spake to Patroclus, that was near:
1765. Set forth a larger bowl, thou son of Menoetius; mingle stronger drink, and prepare each man a cup, for these be men most dear, that are beneath my roof.
1766. So he spake, and Patroclus gave ear to his dear comrade.
1767. He cast down a great fleshing - block in the light of the fire and laid thereon a sheep's back and a fat goat's, and the chine of a great hog withal, rich with fat.
1768. And Automedon held them for him, while goodly Achilles carved.
1769. Then he sliced the meat with care and spitted it upon spits, and the son of Menoetius, a godlike man, made the fire blaze high.
1770. But when the fire had burned down and the flame was abated, he scattered the embers and laid thereover the spits, and sprinkled the morsels with holy salt when he had set them upon the fire-dogs.
1771. But when he had roasted the meat and laid it on platters, Patroclus took bread and dealt it forth on the table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt the meat.
1772. Himself he sate him down over against godlike Odysseus, by the other wall, and bade Patroclus, his comrade, offer sacrifice to the gods; and Patroclus cast burnt-offering into the fire.
1773. So they put forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before them.
1774. But when they had put from them the desire of food and drink, Aias nodded to Phoenix; and goodly Odysseus was ware thereof, and filling a cup with wine he pledged Achilles: Hail, O Achilles, of the equal feast have we no stinting, either in the hut of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, or now in thine; for here is abundance that satisfies the heart to feast withal.
1775. Yet matters of the delicious feast are not in our thoughts, nay, Zeus -nurtured one, it is utter ruin that we behold, and are afraid; for it is in doubt whether we save the benched ships or they perish, except thou clothe thee in thy might.
1776. Hard by the ships and the wall have the Trojans, high of heart, and their far - famed allies set their bivouac, and kindled many fires throughout the host, and they deem that they shall no more be stayed, but will fall upon our black ships.
1777. And Zeus, son of Cronos, shows them signs upon the right with his lightnings, and Hector exulting greatly in his might rageth furiously, trusting in Zeus, and recketh not of men nor gods, for mighty madness hath possessed him.
1778. His prayer is that with all speed sacred Dawn may appear, for he declareth that he will hew from the ships' sterns the topmost ensigns, and burn the very hulls with consuming fire, and amidst them make havoc of the Achaeans, distraught by reason of the smoke.
1779. This then is the great fear of my heart, lest the gods fulfill for him his boastings, and it be our fate to perish here in Troy, far from horse - pasturing Argos.
1780. Nay, up then, if thou art minded even at the last to save from the war-din of the Trojans the sons of the Achaeans, that are sore bested.
1781. To thine own self shall sorrow be hereafter, nor can healing be found for ill once wrought — nay, rather, ere it be too late bethink thee how thou mayest ward from the Danaans the day of evil.
1782. Good friend, surely it was to thee that thy father Peleus gave command on the day when he sent thee to Agamemnon forth from Phthia: ‘ My son, strength shall Athene and Hera give thee if they be so minded, but do thou curb thy proud spirit in thy breast, for gentle - mindedness is the better part; and withdraw thee from strife, contriver of mischief, that so the Argives both young and old may honour thee the more.’
1783. On this wise did that old man charge thee, but thou forgettest.
1784. Yet do thou lease even now, and put from thee thy bitter wrath.
1785. To thee Agamemnon offereth worthy gifts, so thou wilt cease from thine anger.
1786. Nay come, hearken thou to me, and I will tell the tale of all the gifts that in his hut Agamemnon promised thee: seven tripods, that the fire hath not touched, and ten talents of gold and twenty gleaming cauldrons, and twelve strong horses, winners in the race that have won prizes by their fleetness.
1787. Not without booty were a man nor unpossessed of precious gold, whoso had wealth as great as the prizes Agamemnon's horses have won by their speed.
1788. And he will give seven women skilled in goodly handiwork, women of Lesbos, whom on the day when thou thyself tookest well - built Lesbos he chose him from the spoil, and that in beauty surpassed all women folk.
1789. These will he give thee, and amid them shall be she whom he then took away, the daughter of Briseus; and he will furthermore swear a great oath, that never went he up into her bed, neither had dalliance with her, as is the appointed way, O king, of men and women.
1790. All these things shall be ready to thy hand forthwith; and if hereafter it so be the gods grant us to lay waste the great city of Priam, do thou then enter in, what time we Achaeans be dividing the spoil, and heap up thy ship with store of gold and bronze, and thyself choose twenty Trojan women that be fairest after Argive Helen.
1791. And if we return to Achaean Argos, richest of lands, thou shalt be his son, and he will honour thee even as Orestes, that is reared in all abundance, his son well - beloved.
1792. Three daughters has he in his well - builded hall, Chrysothemis, and Laodice, and Ophianassa; of these mayest thou lead to the house of Peleus which one thou wilt, without gifts of wooing; and he will furthermore give a dower full rich, such as no man ever yet gave with his daughter.
1793. And seven well - peopled cities will he give thee, Cardamyle, Enope, and grassy Hire, and sacred Pherae, and Antheia, with deep meadows, and fair Aipeia, and vine - clad Pedasus.
1794. All are nigh the sea, on the uttermost borders of sandy Pylos, and in them dwell men rich in flocks and rich in kine, men that shall honour thee with gifts as though thou wert a god, and beneath thy sceptre shall bring thy ordinances to prosperous fulfillment.
1795. All this will he bring to pass for thee, if thou but cease from thy wrath.
1796. But if the son of Atreus be too utterly hated by thee at heart, himself and his gifts, yet have thou pity at least on the rest of the Achaeans, that are sore bested throughout the host; these shall honour thee as though thou wert a god, for verily shalt thou win great glory in their eyes.
1797. Now mightest thou slay Hector, seeing he would come very nigh thee in his baneful rage, for he deemeth there is no man like unto him among the Danaans that the ships brought hither.
1798. Then in answer to him spake swift - footed Achilles: Zeus-born son of Laërtes, Odysseus of many wiles, needs must I verily speak my word outright, even as I am minded, and as it shall be brought to pass, that ye sit not by me here on this side and on that and prate endlessly.
1799. For hateful in my eyes, even as the gates of Hades, is that man that hideth one thing in his mind and sayeth another.
1800. Nay, I will speak what seemeth to me to be best.
1801. Not me, I ween, shall Atreus' son, Agamemnon, persuade, nor yet shall the other Danaans, seeing there were to be no thanks, it seemeth, for warring against the foeman ever without respite.
1802. Like portion hath he that abideth at home, and if one warreth his best, and in one honour are held both the coward and the brave; death cometh alike to the idle man and to him that worketh much.
1803. Neither have I aught of profit herein, that I suffered woes at heart, ever staking my life in fight.
1804. Even as a bird bringeth in her bill to her unfledged chicks whatever she may find, but with her own self it goeth ill, even so was I wont to watch through many a sleepless night, and bloody days did I pass in battle, fighting with warriors for their women's sake.
1805. Twelve cities of men have I laid waste with my ships and by land eleven, I avow, throughout the fertile land of Troy; from out all these I took much spoil and goodly, and all would I ever bring and give to Agamemnon, this son of Atreus; but he staying behind, even beside his swiftships, would take and apportion some small part, but keep the most.
1806. Some he gave as prizes to chieftains and kings, and for them they abide untouched; but from me alone of the Achaeans hath he taken and keepeth my wife, the darling of my heart.
1807. Let him lie by her side and take his joy.
1808. But why must the Argives wage war against the Trojans?
1809. Why hath he gathered and led hither his host, this son of Atreus?
1810. Was it not for fair - haired Helen's sake?
1811. Do they then alone of mortal men love their wives, these sons of Atreus?
1812. Nay, for whoso is a true man and sound of mind, loveth his own and cherisheth her, even as I too loved her with all my heart, though she was but the captive of my spear.
1813. But now, seeing he hath taken from my arms my prize, and hath deceived me, let him not tempt me that know him well; he shall not persuade me.
1814. Nay, Odysseus, together with thee and the other princes let him take thought to ward from the ships consuming fire.
1815. Verily full much hath he wrought without mine aid; lo, he hath builded a wall and digged a ditch hard by, wide and great, and therein hath he planted stakes; yet even so availeth he not to stay the might of man-slaying Hector.
1816. But so long as I was warring amid the Achaeans Hector had no mind to rouse battle far from the wall, but would come only so far as the Scaean gates and the oak - tree; there once he awaited me in single combat and hardly did he escape my onset.
1817. But now, seeing I am not minded to battle with goodly Hector, tomorrow will I do sacrifice to Zeus and all the gods, and heap well my ships, when I have launched them on the sea; then shalt thou see, if so be thou wilt, and carest aught therefor, my ships at early dawn sailing over the teeming Hellespont, and on board men right eager to ply the oar; and if so be the great Shaker of the Earth grants me fair voyaging, on the third day shall I reach deep-soiled Phthia.
1818. Possessions full many have I that I left on my ill-starred way hither, and yet more shall I bring from hence, gold and ruddy bronze, and fair - girdled women and grey iron — all that fell to me by lot; howbeit my prize hath he that gave it me taken back in his arrogant pride, even lord Agamemnon, son of Atreus.
1819. To him do ye declare all, even as I bid, openly, to the end that other Achaeans also may be wroth, if haply he hopeth to deceive yet some other of the Danaans, seeing he is ever clothed in shamelessness.
1820. Yet not in my face would he dare to look, though he have the front of a dog.
1821. Neither counsel will I devise with him nor any work, for utterly hath he deceived me and sinned against me.
1822. Never again shall he beguile me with words; the past is enough for him.
1823. Nay, let him go to his ruin in comfort, seeing that Zeus the counsellor hath utterly robbed him of his wits.
1824. Hateful in my eyes are his gifts, I count them at a hair's worth.
1825. Not though he gave me ten times, aye twenty times all that now he hath, and if yet other should be added thereto I care not whence, not though it were all the wealth that goeth in to Orchomenus, or to Thebes of Egypt, where treasures in greatest store are laid up in men's houses, — Thebes which is a city of an hundred gates wherefrom sally forth through each two hundred warriors with horses and cars; — nay, not though he gave gifts in number as sand and dust; not even so shall Agamemnon any more persuade my soul, until he hath paid the full price of all the despite that stings my heart.
1826. And the daughter of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, will I not wed, not though she vied in beauty with golden Aphrodite and in handiwork were the peer of flashing - eyed Athene: not even so will I wed her; let him choose another of the Achaeans that is of like station with himself and more kingly than I.
1827. For if the gods preserve me, and I reach my home, Peleus methinks will thereafter of himself seek me a wife.
1828. Many Achaean maidens there be throughout Hellas and Phthia, daughters of chieftains that guard the cities; of these whomsoever I choose shall I make my dear wife.
1829. Full often was my proud spirit fain to take me there a wedded wife, a fitting helpmeet, and to have joy of the possessions that the old man Peleus won him.
1830. For in my eyes not of like worth with life is even all that wealth that men say Ilios possessed, the well - peopled citadel, of old in time of peace or ever the sons of the Achaeans came, — nay, nor all that the marble threshold of the Archer Phoebus Apollo encloseth in rocky Pytho.
1831. For by harrying may cattle be had and goodly sheep, and tripods by the winning and chestnut horses withal; but that the spirit of man should come again when once it hath passed the barrier of his teeth, neither harrying availeth nor winning.
1832. For my mother the goddess, silver - footed Thetis, telleth me that twofold fates are bearing me toward the doom of death: if I abide here and war about the city of the Trojans, then lost is my home-return, but my renown shall be imperishable; but if I return home to my dear native land, lost then is my glorious renown, yet shall my life long endure, neither shall the doom of death come soon upon me.
1833. Aye, and I would counsel you others also to sail back to your homes; seeing there is no more hope that ye shall win the goal of steep Ilios; for mightily doth Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, hold forth his hand above her, and her people are filled with courage.
1834. But go ye your way and declare my message to the chieftains of the Achaeans — for that is the office of elders — to the end that they may devise some other plan in their minds better than this, even such as shall save their ships, and the host of the Achaeans beside the hollow ships; seeing this is not to be had for them, which now they have devised, by reason of the fierceness of my anger.
1835. Howbeit let Phoenix abide here with us, and lay him down to sleep, that he may follow with me on my ships to my dear native land on the morrow, if so he will; but perforce will I not take him.
1836. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence, marveling at his words; for with exceeding vehemence did he deny them.
1837. But at length there spake among them the old horseman Phoenix, bursting into tears, for that greatly did he fear for the ships of the Achaeans:
1838. If verily thou layest up in thy mind, glorious Achilles, the purpose of returning, neither art minded at all to ward from the swift ships consuming fire, for that wrath hath fallen upon thy heart; how can I then, dear child, be left here without thee, alone?
1839. It was to thee that the old horseman Peleus sent me on the day when he sent thee to Agamemnon, forth from Phthia, a mere child, knowing naught as yet of evil war, neither of gatherings wherein men wax preeminent.
1840. For this cause sent he me to instruct thee in all these things, to be both a speaker of words and a doer of deeds.
1841. Wherefore, dear child, I am not minded hereafter to be left alone without thee, nay, not though a god himself should pledge him to strip from me my old age and render me strong in youth as in the day when first I left Hellas, the home of fair women, fleeing from strife with my father Amyntor, son of Ormenus; for he waxed grievously wroth against me by reason of his fair - haired concubine, whom himself he ever cherished, and scorned his wife, my mother.
1842. So she besought me by my knees continually, to have dalliance with that other first myself, that the old man might be hateful in her eyes.
1843. I hearkened to her and did the deed, but my father was ware thereof forthwith and cursed me mightily, and invoked the dire Erinyes that never should there sit upon his knees a dear child begotten of me; and the gods fulfilled his curse, even Zeus of the nether world and dread Persephone.
1844. Then I took counsel to slay him with the sharp sword, but some one of the immortals stayed mine anger, bringing to my mind the voice of the people and the many revilings of men, to the end that I should not be called a father - slayer amid the Achaeans.
1845. Then might the heart in my breast in no wise be any more stayed to linger in the halls of my angered father.
1846. My fellows verily and my kinsfolk beset me about with many prayers and sought to stay me there in the halls, and many goodly sheep did they slaughter, and sleek kine of shambling gait, and many swine, rich with fat, were stretched to singe over the flame of Hephaestus, and wine in plenty was drunk from the jars of that old man.
1847. For nine nights' space about mine own body did they watch the night through; in turn kept they watch, neither were the fires quenched, one beneath the portico of the well - fenced court, and one in the porch before the door of my chamber.
1848. Howbeit when the tenth dark night was come upon me, then verily I burst the cunningly fitted doors of my chamber and leapt the fence of the court full easily, unseen of the watchmen and the slave women.
1849. Thereafter I fled afar through spacious Hellas, and came to deep-soiled Phthia, mother of flocks, unto king Peleus; and he received me with a ready heart, and cherished me as a father cherisheth his only son and well - beloved, that is heir to great possessions; and he made me rich and gave much people to me, and I dwelt on the furthermost border of Phthia, ruling over the Dolopians.
1850. And I reared thee to be such as thou art, O godlike Achilles, loving thee from may heart; for with none other wouldest thou go to the feast neither take meat in the hall, till I had set thee on my knees and given thee thy fill of the savoury morsel cut first for thee, and had put the wine cup to thy lips.
1851. Full often hast thou wetted the tunic upon my breast, sputtering forth the wine in thy sorry helplessness.
1852. So have I suffered much for thee and toiled much, ever mindful of this that the gods would in no wise vouchsafe me a son born of mine own body.
1853. Nay. it was thou that I sought to make my son, O godlike Achilles, to the end that thou mayest hereafter save me from shameful ruin.
1854. Wherefore Achilles, do thou master thy proud spirit; it beseemeth thee not to have a pitiless heart.
1855. Nay, even the very gods can bend, and theirs withal is more excellent worth and honour and might.
1856. Their hearts by incense and reverent vows and libations and the savour of sacrifice do men turn from wrath with supplication, whenso any man transgresseth and doeth sin.
1857. For Prayers are the daughters of great Zeus, halting and wrinkled and of eyes askance, and they are ever mindful to follow in the steps of Sin.
1858. Howbeit
1859. Sin is strong and fleet of foot, wherefore she far out - runneth them all, and goeth before them over the face of all the earth making men to fall, and Prayers follow after, seeking to heal the hurt.
1860. Now whoso revereth the daughters of Zeus when they draw nigh, him they greatly bless, and hear him, when he prayeth; but if a man denieth them and stubbornly refuseth, then they go their way and make prayer to Zeus, son of Cronos, that Ate may follow after such a one to the end that he may fall and pay full atonement.
1861. Nay, Achilles, see thou too that reverence attend upon the daughters of Zeus, even such as bendeth the hearts of all men that are upright.
1862. For if the son of Atreus were not offering thee gifts and telling of yet others hereafter, but were ever furiously wroth, I of a surety should not bid thee cast aside thine anger and bear aid to the Argives even in their sore need.
1863. But now he offereth thee many gifts forthwith, and promiseth thee more hereafter, and hath sent forth warriors to beseech thee, choosing them that are best throughout the host of the Achaeans, and that to thine own self are dearest of the Argives; have not thou scorn of their words, neither of their coming hither; though till then no man could blame thee that thou wast wroth.
1864. Even in this manner have we heard the fame of men of old that were warriors, whenso furious wrath came upon any; won might they be by gifts, and turned aside by pleadings.
1865. Myself I bear in mind this deed of old days and not of yesterday, how it was; and I will tell it among you that are all my friends.
1866. The Curetes on a time were fighting and the Aetolians staunch in battle around the city of Calydon, and were slaying one another, the Aetolians defending lovely Calydon and the Curetes fain to waste it utterly in war.
1867. For upon their folk had Artemis of the golden throne sent a plague in wrath that Oeneus offered not to her the first-fruits of the harvest in his rich orchard land; whereas the other gods feasted on hecatombs, and it was to the daughter of great Zeus alone that he offered not, whether haply he forgat, or marked it not; and he was greatly blinded in heart.
1868. Thereat the Archer-goddess, the child of Zeus, waxed wroth and sent against him a fierce wild boar, white of tusk, that wrought much evil, wasting the orchard land of Oeneus; many a tall tree did he uproot and cast upon the ground, aye, root and apple blossom therewith.
1869. But the boar did Meleager, son of Oeneus, slay, when he had gathered out of many cities huntsmen and hounds; for not of few men could the boar have been slain, so huge was he; and many a man set he upon the grievous pyre.
1870. But about his body the goddess brought to pass much clamour and shouting concerning his head and shaggy hide, between the Curetes and the great-souled Aetolians.
1871. Now so long as Meleager, dear to Ares, warred, so long went it ill with the Curetes, nor might they abide without their wall, for all they were very many.
1872. But when wrath entered into Meleager, wrath that maketh the heart to swell in the breasts also of others, even though they be wise, he then, wroth at heart against his dear mother Althaea, abode beside his wedded wife, the fair Cleopatra, daughter of Marpessa of the fair ankles, child of Evenus, and of Idas that was mightiest of men that were then upon the face of earth; who also took his bow to face the king Phoebus Apollo for the sake of the fair - ankled maid.
1873. Her of old in their halls had her father and honoured mother called Halcyone by name, for that the mother herself in a plight even as that of the halcyon- bird of many sorrows, wept because Apollo that worketh afar had snatched her child away.
1874. By her side lay Meleager nursing his bitter anger, wroth because of his mother's curses; for she prayed instantly to the gods, being grieved for her brother's slaying; and furthermore instantly beat with her hands upon the all - nurturing earth, calling upon Hades and dread Persephone, the while she knelt and made the folds of her bosom wet with tears, that they should bring death upon her son; and the Erinys that walketh in darkness heard her from Erebus, even she of the ungentle heart.
1875. Now anon was the din of the foemen risen about their gates, and the noise of the battering of walls, and to Meleager the elders of the Aetolians made prayer, sending to him the best of the priests of the gods, that he should come forth and succour them, and they promised him a mighty gift; they bade him, where the plain of lovely Calydon was fattest, there choose a fair tract of fifty acres, the half of it vineland, and the half clear plough - land, to be cut from out the plain.
1876. And earnestly the old horseman Oeneus besought him, standing upon the threshold of his high - roofed chamber, and shaking the jointed doors, in prayer to his son, and earnestly too did his sisters and his honoured mother beseech him — but he denied them yet more — and earnestly his companions that were truest and dearest to him of all; yet not even so could they persuade the heart in his breast, until at the last his chamber was being hotly battered, and the Curetes were mounting upon the walls and firing the great city.
1877. Then verily his fair - girdled wife besought Meleager with wailing, and told him all the woes that come on men whose city is taken; the men are slain and the city is wasted by fire, and their children and low-girdled women are led captive of strangers.
1878. Then was his spirit stirred, as he heard the evil tale, and he went his way and did on his body his gleaming armour.
1879. Thus did he ward from the Aetolians the day of evil, yielding to his own spirit; and to him thereafter they paid not the gifts, many and gracious; yet even so did he ward from them evil.
1880. But, friend, let me not see thee thus minded in heart, neither let heaven turn thee into this path; it were a harder task to save the ships already burning.
1881. Nay, come while yet gifts may be had; the Achaeans shall honour thee even as a god.
1882. But if without gifts thou enter into the battle, the bane of men, thou shalt not then be in like honour, for all thou mayest ward off the battle.
1883. Then in answer to him spake Achilles, swift of foot: Phoenix, old sire, my father, nurtured of Zeus, in no wise have I need of this honour: honoured have I been, I deem, by the apportionment of Zeus, which shall be mine amid the beaked ships so long as the breath abideth in my breast and my knees are quick.
1884. And another thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to heart; seek not to confound my spirit by weeping and sorrowing, to do the pleasure of the warrior, son of Atreus; it beseemeth thee not to cherish him, lest thou be hated of me that cherish thee.
1885. Well were it that with me thou shouldest vex him whosoever vexeth me.
1886. Be thou king even as I am, and share the half of my honour.
1887. Howbeit these shall bear my message, but abide thou here and lay thee down on a soft couch, and at break of day we will take counsel whether to return to our own or to tarry here.
1888. He spake and to Patroclus nodded his brow in silence that he should spread for Phoenix a thick couch, that the others might forthwith bethink them to depart from the hut.
1889. But among them Aias, the godlike son of Telamon, spake, saying: Zeus — born son of Laërtes, Odysseus of many wiles, let us go our way, for the fulfillment of the charge laid on us will not methinks be brought to pass by our coming hither; and it behoveth us with speed to declare the message, though it be no wise good, to the Danaans, that, I ween, now sit waiting therefor.
1890. But Achilles hath wrought to fury the proud heart within him, cruel man !
1891. neither recketh he of the love of his comrades wherewith we ever honoured him amid the ships above all others — pitiless one !
1892. Lo, a man accepteth recompense from the slayer of his brother, or for his dead son; and the slayer abideth in his own land for the paying of a great price, and the kinsman's heart and proud spirit are restrained by the taking of recompense.
1893. But as for thee, the gods have put in thy breast a heart that is obdurate and evil by reason of one only girl; whereas we now offer thee seven, far the best that there be, and many other gffts besides; nay then, take to thee a heart of grace, and have respect unto thine hall; for under thy roof are we come from the host of the Danaans, and we would fain be nearest to thee and dearest beyond all other Achaeans as many as there be.
1894. Then in answer to him spake Achilles, swift of foot: Aias, sprung from Zeus, thou son of Telamon, captain of the host, all this thou seemest to speak almost after mine own mind; but my heart swelleth with wrath whenso I think of this, how the son of Atreus hath wrought indignity upon me amid the Argives, as though I were some alien that had no rights.
1895. Howbeit do ye go and declare my message, for I will not sooner bethink me of bloody war until wise - hearted Priam's son, even goodly Hector, be come to the huts and ships of the Myrmidons, as he slays the Argives, and have smirched the ships with fire.
1896. But about my hut and my black ship I deem that Hector will be stayed, eager though he be for battle.
1897. So spake he, but they took each man a two handled cup, and when they had made libation went their way along the lines of ships, and Odysseus led.
1898. But Patroclus bade his comrades and the handmaids spread forthwith a thick couch for Phoenix; and they obeyed, and spread the couch, as he bade, fleeces and a rug and soft fabric of linen.
1899. There the old man laid him down and waited for bright Dawn.
1900. But Achilles slept in the innermost part of the well - builded hut, and by his side lay a woman that he had brought from Lesbos, even the daughter of Phorbas, fair - cheeked Diomede.
1901. And Patroclus laid him down on the opposite side, and by him in like manner lay fair - girdled Iphis, whom goodly Achilles had given him when he took steep Scyrus, the city of Enyeus.
1902. But when the others were now come to the huts of the son of Atreus, the sons of the Achaeans stood up on this side and that and pledged them in cups of gold, and questioned them, and the king of men, Agamemnon, was the first to ask:
1903. Come, tell me now, Odysseus, greatly to be praised, thou great glory of the Achaeans, is he minded to ward off consuming fire from the ships, or said he nay, and doth wrath still possess his proud spirit?
1904. Then much-enduring goodly Odysseus answered him: Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, he verily is not minded to quench his wrath but is filled yet more with fury, and will have none of thee, or of thy gifts.
1905. For thine own self he biddeth thee to take counsel amid the Argives how thou mayest save the ships and the host of the Achaeans.
1906. But himself he threateneth that at break of day he will launch upon the sea his well - benched curved ships.
1907. Aye and he said that he would counsel others also to sail back to their homes, seeing there is no more hope that ye shall win the goal of steep Ilios; for mightily doth Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, hold forth his hand above her, and her people are filled with courage.
1908. So spake he, and these be here also to tell thee this, even they that followed with me, Aias and the heralds twain, men of prudence both.
1909. But the old man Phoenix laid him down there to rest, for so Achilles bade, that he may follow with him on his ships to his dear native land on the morrow, if he will, but perforce will he not take him.
1910. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence marvelling at his words; for full masterfully did he address their gathering.
1911. Long time were they silent in their grief, the sons of the Achaeans, but at length there spake among them Diomedes, good at the war -cry:
1912. Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, would thou hadst never besought the peerless son of Peleus, nor offered countless gifs; haughty is he even of himself, and now hast thou yet far more set him amid haughtinesses.
1913. But verily we will let him be; he may depart or he may tarry; hereafter will he fight when the heart in his breast shall bid him, and a god arouse him.
1914. But come, even as I shall bid, let us all obey.
1915. For this present go ye to your rest, when ye have satisfied your hearts with meat and wine, for therein is courage and strength; but so soon as fair, rosy- fingered Dawn appeareth, forthwith do thou array before the ships thy folk and thy chariots, and urge them on; and fight thou thyself amid the foremost.
1916. So spake he, and all the kings assented thereto, marvelling at the words of Diomedes, tamer of horses.
1917. Then they made libation, and went every man to his hut, and there laid them down and took the gift of sleep.
1918. Now beside their ships all the other chieftains of the host of the Achaeans were slumbering the whole night through, overcome of soft sleep, but Agamemnon, son of Atreus, shepherd of the host, was not holden of sweet sleep, so many things debated he in mind.
1919. Even as when the lord of fair - haired Hera lighteneth, what time he maketh ready either a mighty rain unspeakable or hail or snow, when the snow - flakes sprinkle the fields, or haply the wide mouth of bitter war; even so often did Agamemnon groan from the deep of his breast, and his heart trembled within him.
1920. So often as he gazed toward the Trojan plain, he marvelled at the many fires that burned before the face of Ilios, and at the sound of flutes and pipes, and the din of men; but whensoever he looked toward the ships and the host of the Achaeans, then many were the hairs that he pulled from his head by the very roots in appeal to Zeus that is above, and in his noble heart he groaned mightily.
1921. And this plan seemed to his mind the best, to go first of all to Nestor, son of Neleus, if so be he might contrive with him some goodly device that should be for the warding off of evil from the Danaan host.
1922. So he sate him up and did on his tunic about his breast, and beneath his shining feet bound his fair sandals, and thereafter clad him in the tawny skin of a lion, fiery and great, a skin that reached his feet; and he grasped his spear.
1923. And even in like manner was Menelaus holden of trembling fear — for on his eyelids too sleep settled not down — lest aught should befall the Argives who for his sake had come to Troy over the wide waters of the sea, pondering in their hearts fierce war.
1924. With a leopard's skin first he covered his broad shoulders, a dappled fell, and lifted up and set upon his head a helmet of bronze, and grasped a spear in his stout hand.
1925. Then he went his way to rouse his brother, that ruled mightily over all the Argives, and was honoured of the folk even as a god.
1926. Him he found putting about his shoulders his fair armour by the stern of his ship, and welcome was he to him as he came.
1927. To him first spake Menelaus, good at the war -cry: Wherefore, my brother, art thou thus arming?
1928. Wilt thou be rousing some man of thy comrades to spy upon the Trojans?
1929. Nay, sorely am I afraid lest none should undertake for thee this task, to go forth alone and spy upon the foemen, through the immortal night; right hardy of heart must that man be.
1930. Then in answer to him spake lord Agamemnon:
1931. Need have we, both thou and I, O Menelaus, fostered of Zeus, of shrewd counsel that shall save and deliver the Argives and their ships, seeing the mind of Zeus is turned.
1932. To the sacrifices of Hector, it seemeth, his heart inclineth rather than to ours.
1933. For never have I seen neither heard by the telling of another that one man devised in one day so many terrible deeds, as Hector, dear to Zeus, hath wrought upon the sons of the Achaeans, by himself alone, he that is not the dear son of goddess or of god.
1934. Deeds hath he wrought that methinks will be a sorrow to the Argives for ever and aye, so many evils hath he devised against the Achaeans.
1935. But go now, run swiftly along the lines of ships and call hither Aias and Idomeneus, and I will go to goodly Nestor and bid him arise, if so be he will be minded to go to the sacred company of the sentinels and give them charge.
1936. To him would they hearken as to no other, for his son is captain over the guard, he and Meriones, comrade of Idomeneus; for to them above all we entrusted this charge.
1937. Then made answer to him Menelaus, good at the war -cry:
1938. With what meaning doth thy word thus charge and command me?
1939. Shall I abide there with them, waiting until thou shalt come, or run back to thee again, when I have duly laid on them thy command?
1940. And to him did the king of men, Agamemnon, make answer, saying:
1941. Abide there, lest haply we miss each other as we go, for many are the paths throughout the camp.
1942. But lift up thy voice wheresoever thou goest, and bid men be awake, calling each man by his lineage and his father's name, giving due honour to each, and be not thou proud of heart but rather let us ourselves be busy; even thus I ween hath Zeus laid upon us even at our birth the heaviness of woe.
1943. So spake he, and sent forth his brother when he had duly given him commandment.
1944. But he went his way after Nestor, shepherd of the host, and found him by his hut and his black ship on his soft bed, and beside him lay his armour richly dight, his shield and two spears and gleaming helmet.
1945. And by his side lay the flashing girdle, wherewith the old man was wont to gird himself, whenso he arrayed him for battle, the bane of men, and led forth his people, for he yielded not to grievous old age.
1946. He rose upon his elbow, lifting up his head, and spake to the son of Atreus, and questioned him, saying:
1947. Who art thou that art faring alone by the ships throughout the camp in the darkness of night, when other mortals are sleeping?
1948. Seekest thou one of thy mules, or of thy comrades?
1949. Speak, and come not silently upon me.
1950. Of what hast thou need?
1951. Then made answer the king of men, Agamemnon: Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans, thou shalt know Agamemnon, son of Atreus, whom beyond all others Zeus hath set amid toils continually, so long as the breath abideth in my breast and my knees are quick.
1952. I wander thus, because sweet sleep settleth not upon mine eyes, but war is a trouble to me and the woes of the Achaeans.
1953. Wondrously do I fear for the Danaans, nor is my mind firm, but I am tossed to and fro, and my heart leapeth forth from out my breast, and my glorious limbs tremble beneath me.
1954. But if thou wouldest do aught, seeing on thee too sleep cometh not, come, let us go to the sentinels, that we may look to them, lest fordone with toil and drowsiness they be slumbering, and have wholly forgot their watch.
1955. The foemen bivouac hard by, nor know we at all whether haply they may not be fain to do battle even in the night.
1956. Then made answer to him the horseman Nestor of Gerenia: Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, of a surety not all his purposes shall Zeus the counsellor fulfill for Hector, even all that now he thinketh; nay methinks he shall labour amid troubles yet more than ours, if so be Achilles shall turn his heart from grievous anger.
1957. Howbeit with thee will I gladly follow, but let us moreover arouse others also, both the son of Tydeus, famed for his spear, and Odysseus, and the swift Aias, and the valiant son of Phyleus.
1958. And I would that one should go and summon these also, the godlike Aias and lord Idomeneus, for their ships are furthest of all and nowise nigh at hand.
1959. But Menelaus will I chide, dear though he be and honoured, aye, though thou shouldest be angry with me, nor will I hide my thought, for that he sleepeth thus, and hath suffered thee to toil alone.
1960. Now had it been meet that he laboured among all the chieftains, beseeching them, for need has come upon them that may no longer be borne.
1961. And to him did the king of men, Agamemnon, make answer, saying:
1962. Old sir, at another time shalt thou chide him even at mine own bidding, seeing he is often slack and not minded to labour, neither yielding to sloth nor to heedlessness of mind, but ever looking to me and awaiting my leading.
1963. But now he awoke even before myself, and came to me, and myself I sent him forth to summon those of whom thou inquirest.
1964. But let us go; we shall find them before the gates amid the sentinels, for there I bade them gather.
1965. Then made answer to him the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia:
1966. So will no man be wroth at him or disobey him of all the Argives, whenso he urgeth any man or giveth commands.
1967. So saying he did on his tunic about his breast, and beneath his shining feet bound his fair sandals and around him buckled a purple cloak of double fold and wide, whereon the down was thick.
1968. And he grasped a mighty spear, tipped with sharp bronze, and went his way among the ships of the brazen - coated Achaeans.
1969. Then Odysseus first, the peer of Zeus in counsel, did the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, awaken out of sleep with his voice, and forthwith the call rang all about his mind and he came forth from the hut and spake to them, saying:
1970. How is it that ye fare thus alone by the ships throughout the camp in the immortal night?
1971. What need so great hath come upon you?
1972. Then made answer to him the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia: Zeus - born son of Laërtes, Odysseus of many wiles, be not thou wroth, for great sorrow hath overmastered the Achaeans.
1973. Nay, follow, that we may arouse another also, whomsoever it behoveth to take counsel, whether to flee or to fight.
1974. So spake he, and Odysseus of many wiles went to the hut and cast about his shoulders a shield richly dight, and followed after them.
1975. And they came to Tydeus' son, Diomedes, and him they found outside his hut with his arms; and around him his comrades were sleeping with their shields beneath their heads, but their spears were driven into the ground erect on their spikes, and afar shone the bronze like the lightning of father Zeus.
1976. But the warrior was sleeping, and beneath him was spread the hide of an ox of the field, and beneath his head was stretched a bright carpet.
1977. To his side came the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, and woke him, stirring him with a touch of his heel, and aroused him, and chid him to his face: Awake, son of Tydeus, why slumberest thou the whole night through in sleep?
1978. Knowest thou not that the Trojans on the rising ground of the plain are camped hard by the ships, and but scant space still holdeth them off?
1979. So said he, but the other right swiftly sprang up out of sleep, and he spake and addressed him with winged words:
1980. Hardy art thou, old sir, and from toil thou never ceasest.
1981. Are there not other sons of the Achaeans that be younger, who might then rouse each one of the kings, going everywhere throughout the host?
1982. But with thee, old sir, may no man deal.
1983. Then the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, answered him: Nay verily, friend, all this hast thou spoken according to right.
1984. Peerless sons have I, and folk there be full many, of whom any one might go and call others.
1985. But in good sooth great need hath overmastered the Achaeans, for now to all it standeth on a razor's edge, either woeful ruin for the Achaeans, or to live.
1986. But go now and rouse swift Aias and the son of Phyleus, for thou art younger — if so be thou pitiest me.
1987. So spake he, and Diomedes clad about his shoulders the skin of a lion, fiery and great, a skin that reached his feet, and grasped his spear, and he went his way, and roused those warriors from where they were, and brought them.
1988. Now when they had joined the company of the sentinels as they were gathered together, they found not the leaders of the sentinels asleep, but all were sitting awake with their arms.
1989. And even as dogs keep painful watch about sheep in a fold, when they hear the wild beast, stout of heart, that cometh through the wood among the hills, and a great din ariseth about him of men and dogs, and from them sleep perisheth; even so from their eyelids did sweet sleep perish, as they kept watch through the evil night; for toward the plain were they ever turning if haply they might hear the Trojans coming on.
1990. At sight of them the old man waxed glad and heartened them, and spake and addressed them with winged words:
1991. Even so now, dear children, keep your watch, neither let sleep seize any man, lest we become a cause of rejoicing to our foes.
1992. So saying he hasted through the trench, and there followed with him the kings of the Argives, even all that had been called to the council.
1993. But with them went Meriones and the glorious son of Nestor; for of themselves they bade these share in their counsel.
1994. So they went through and out from the digged ditch and sate them down in an open space, where the ground shewed clear of dead men fallen, even where mighty Hector had turned back again from destroying the Argives, when night enfolded him.
1995. There they sate them down and spake one to the other, and among them the horse - man, Nestor of Gerenia, was first to speak:
1996. My friends, is there then no man who would trust his own venturous spirit to go among the great-souled Trojans, if so be he might slay some straggler of the foemen, or haply hear some rumour among the Trojans, and what counsel they devise among themselves, whether to abide where they be by the ships afar, or to withdraw again to the city, seeing they have worsted the Achaeans?
1997. All this might he learn, and come back to us unscathed: great would his fame be under heaven among all men, and a goodly gift shall be his.
1998. For of all the princes that hold sway over the ships, of all these shall every man give him a black ewe with a lamb at the teat — therewith may no possession compare; — and ever shall he be with us at feasts and drinking - bouts.
1999. So said he, and they all became hushed in silence.
2000. Then spake among them Diomedes, good at the war -cry: Nestor, my heart and proud spirit urge me to enter the camp of the foemen that are near, even of the Trojans; howbeit if some other man were to follow with me, greater comfort would there be, and greater confidence.
2001. When two go together, one discerneth before the other how profit may be had; whereas if one alone perceive aught, yet is his wit the shorter, and but slender his device.
2002. So spake he, and many there were that were fain to follow Diomedes.
2003. Fain were the two Aiantes, squires of Ares, fain was Meriones, and right fain the son of Nestor, fain was the son of Atreus, Menelaus, famed for his spear, and fain too was the stead - fast Odysseus to steal into the throng of the Trojans, for ever daring was the spirit in his breast.
2004. Then among them spake the king of men, Agamemnon: Diomedes, son of Tydeus, dear to my heart, that man shalt thou choose as thy comrade, whomsoever thou wilt, the best of them that offer themselves, for many are eager.
2005. And do not thou out of reverent heart leave the better man behind, and take as thy comrade one that is worse, yielding to reverence, and looking to birth, nay, not though one be more kingly.
2006. So said he, since he feared for the sake of fair - haired Menelaus.
2007. But among them spake again Diomedes, good at the war -cry:
2008. If of a truth ye bid me of myself choose me a comrade, how should I then forget godlike Odysseus, whose heart and proud spirit are beyond all others eager in all manner of toils; and Pallas Athene loveth him.
2009. If he but follow with me, even out of blazing fire might we both return, for wise above all is he in understanding.
2010. Then spake unto him much enduring goodly Odysseus: Son of Tydeus, praise me not over-much, neither blame me in aught: this thou sayest among the Argives that themselves know all.
2011. Nay, let us go, for verily the night is waning and dawn draweth near; lo, the stars have moved onward, and of the night more than two watches have past, and the third alone is left us.
2012. So saying the twain clothed them in their dread armour.
2013. To Tydeus' son Thrasymedes, staunch in fight, gave a two -edged sword — for his own was left by his ship — and a shield, and about his head he set a helm of bull's hide without horn and without crest, a helm that is called a skull - cap, and that guards the heads of lusty youths.
2014. And Meriones gave to Odysseus a bow and a quiver and a sword, and about his head he set a helm wrought of hide, and with many a tight - stretched thong was it made stiff within, while without the white teeth of a boar of gleaming tusks were set thick on this side and that, well and cunningly, and within was fixed a lining of felt.
2015. This cap Autolycus on a time stole out of Eleon when he had broken into the stout - built house of Amyntor, son of Ormenus; and he gave it to Amphidamas of Cythem to take to Scandeia, and Amphidamas gave it to Molus as a guest - gift, but he gave it to his own son Meriones to wear; and now, being set thereon, it covered the head of Odysseus.
2016. So when the twain had clothed them in their dread armour, they went their way and left there all the chieftains.
2017. And for them Pallas Athene sent forth on their right a heron, hard by the way, and though they saw it not through the darkness of night, yet they heard its cry.
2018. And Odysseus was glad at the omen, and made prayer to Athene: Hear me, child of Zeus, that beareth the aegis, thou that dost ever stand by my side in all manner of toils, nor am I unseen of thee where'er I move; now again be thou my friend, Athene, as ne'er thou wast before, and grant that with goodly renown we come back to the ships, having wrought a great work that shall be a sorrow to the Trojans.
2019. And after him again prayed Diomedes, good at the war -cry:
2020. Hearken thou now also to me, child of Zeus, unwearied one.
2021. Follow now with me even as thou didst follow with my father, goodly Tydeus, into Thebes, what time he went forth as a messenger of the Achaeans.
2022. Them he left by the Asopus, the brazen - coated Achaeans, and he bare a gentle word thither to the Cadmeians; but as he journeyed back he devised deeds right terrible with thee, fair goddess, for with a ready heart thou stoodest by his side.
2023. Even so now of thine own will stand thou by my side, and guard me.
2024. And to thee in return will I sacrifice a sleek heifer, broad of brow, unbroken, which no man hath yet led beneath the yoke.
2025. Her will I sacrifice to thee and will overlay her horns with gold.
2026. So they spake in prayer and Pallas Athene heard them.
2027. But when they had prayed to the daughter of great Zeus, they went their way like two lions through the black night, amid the slaughter, amid the corpses, through the arms and the black blood.
2028. Nay, nor did Hector suffer the lordly Trojans to sleep, but he called together all the noblest, as many as were leaders and rulers of the Trojans; and when he had called them together he contrived a cunning plan, and said:
2029. Who is there now that would promise me this deed and bring it to pass for a great gift?
2030. Verily his reward shall be sure.
2031. For I will give him a chariot and two horses with high arched necks, even those that be the best at the swift ships of the Achaeans, to the man whosoever will dare — and for himself win glory withal — to go close to the swift - faring ships, and spy out whether the swift ships be guarded as of old, or whether by now our foes, subdued beneath our hands, are planning flight among themselves and have no mind to watch the night through, being fordone with dread weariness.
2032. So spake he and they all became hushed in silence.
2033. Now there was among the Trojans one Dolon, the son of Eumedes the godlike herald, a man rich in gold, rich in bronze, that was ill-favoured to look upon, but withal swift of foot; and he was the only brother among five sisters.
2034. He then spake a word to the Trojans and to Hector: Hector, my heart and proud spirit urge me to go close to the swift - faring ships and spy out all.
2035. But come, I pray thee, lift up thy staff and swear to me that verily thou wilt give me the horses and the chariot, richly dight with bronze, even them that bear the peerless son of Peleus.
2036. And to thee shall I prove no vain scout, neither one to deceive thy hopes.
2037. For I will go straight on to the camp, even until I come to the ship of Agamemnon, where, I ween, the chieftains will be holding council, whether to flee or to fight.
2038. So spake he, and Hector took the staff in his hands, and sware to him, saying:
2039. Now be my witness Zeus himself, the loud - thundering lord of Hera, that on those horses no other man of the Trojans shall mount, but it is thou, I declare, that shalt have glory in them continually.
2040. So spake he, and swore thereto an idle oath, and stirred the heart of Dolon.
2041. Forthwith then he cast about his shoulders his curved bow, and thereover clad him in the skin of a grey wolf, and on his head he set a cap of ferret skin, and grasped a sharp javelin, and went his way toward the ships from the host; howbeit he was not to return again from the ships, and bear tidings to Hector.
2042. But when he had left the throng of horses and of men, he went forth eagerly on the way, and Odysseus, sprung from Zeus, was ware of him as he drew nigh, and spake to Diomedes: Yonder, Diomedes, cometh some man from the camp, I know not whether as a spy upon our ships, or with intent to strip one or another of the corpses of the dead.
2043. But let us suffer him at the first to pass by us on the plain a little way, and thereafter let us rush forth upon him and seize him speedily; and if so be he outrun us twain by speed of foot ever do thou hem him in toward the ships away from the host, darting after him with thy spear, lest in any wise he escape toward the city.
2044. So saying the twain laid them down among the dead apart from the path, but he ran quickly past them in his witlessness.
2045. But when he was as far off as is the range of mules in ploughing — for they are better than oxen to draw through deep fallow land the jointed plough — then the two ran after him, and he stood still when he heard the sound, for in his heart he supposed that they were friends coming from amid the Trojans to turn him back, and that Hector was withdrawing the host.
2046. But when they were a spear - cast off or even less, he knew them for foemen and plied his limbs swiftly in flight, and they speedily set out in pursuit.
2047. And as when two sharp - fanged hounds, — skilled in the hunt, press hard on a doe or a hare in a wooded place, and it ever runneth screaming before them; even so did the son of Tydeus, and Odysseus, sacker of cities, cut Dolon off from the host and ever pursue hard after him.
2048. But when he was now about to come among the sentinels, as he fled towards the ships, then verily Athene put strength into Tydeus' son, that no man among the brazen - coated Achaeans might before him boast to have dealt the blow, and he come too late.
2049. And mighty Diomedes rushed upon him with his spear, and called: Stand, or I shall reach thee with the spear, and I deem thou shalt not long escape sheer destruction at my hand.
2050. He spake, and hurled his spear, but of purpose he missed the man, and over his right shoulder passed the point of the polished spear, and fixed itself in the ground; and Dolon stood still, seized with terror, stammering and pale with fear, and the teeth clattered in his mouth; and the twain panting for breath came upon him, and seized his hands; and he with a burst of tears spake to them, saying:
2051. Take me alive, and I will ransom myself; for at home have I store of bronze and gold and iron, wrought with toil; thereof would my father grant you ransom past counting, should he hear that I am alive at the ships of the Achaeans.
2052. Then in answer to him spake Odysseus of many wiles:
2053. Be of good cheer, and let not death be in thy thoughts.
2054. But come, tell me this, and declare it truly.
2055. Whither dost thou fare thus alone to the ships from the host in the darkness of night, when other mortals are sleeping?
2056. Is it with intent to strip one or another of the corpses of the dead?
2057. Did Hector send thee forth to the hollow ships to spy out all, or did thine own heart bid thee?
2058. To him then Dolon made answer, and his limbs trembled beneath him: With many infatuate hopes did Hector lead my wits astray, who pledged him to give me the single - hooved horses of the lordly son of Peleus, and his chariot richly dight with bronze; and he bade me go through the swift, black night close to the foemen, and spy out whether the swift ships be guarded as of old, or whether by now our foes, subdued beneath our hands, are planning flight among themselves, and have no mind to watch the night through, being fordone with dread weariness.
2059. Then smiling upon him Odysseus of many wiles made answer: Verily now on great rewards was thy heart set, even the horses of the wise - hearted son of Aeacus, but hard are they for mortal men to master or to drive, save only for Achilles whom an immortal mother bare.
2060. But come tell me this, and declare it truly: where now, as thou camest hither, didst thou leave Hector, shepherd of the host?
2061. Where lies his battle - gear, and where his horses?
2062. And how are disposed the watches and the sleeping - places of the other Trojans?
2063. And what counsel devise they among themselves? —
2064. to abide where they be by the ships afar, or to withdraw again to the city, seeing they have worsted the Achaeans?
2065. Then made answer to him Dolon, son of Eumedes: Verily now will I frankly tell thee all.
2066. Hector with all them that are counsellors is holding council by the tomb of godlike Ilus, away from the turmoil; but as touching the guards whereof thou askest, O warrior, no special guard keepeth or watcheth the host.
2067. By all the watch - fires of the Trojans verily, they that needs must, lie awake and bid one another keep watch, but the allies, summoned from many lands, are sleeping; for to the Trojans they leave it to keep watch, seeing their own children abide not nigh, neither their wives.
2068. Then in answer to him spake Odysseus of many wiles:
2069. How is it now, do they sleep mingled with the horse - taming Trojans, or apart?
2070. tell me at large that I may know.
2071. Then made answer to him Dolon, son of Eumedes:
2072. Verily now this likewise will I frankly tell thee.
2073. Towards the sea lie the Carians and the Paeonians, with curved bows, and the Leleges and Caucones, and the goodly Pelasgi.
2074. And towards Thymbre fell the lot of the Lycians and the lordly Mysians, and the Phrygians that fight from chariots and the Maeonians, lords of chariots.
2075. But why is it that ye question me closely regarding all these things?
2076. For if ye are fain to enter the throng of the Trojans, lo, here apart be the Thracians, new comers, the outermost of all, and among them their king Rhesus, son of Eïoneus.
2077. His be verily the fairest horses that ever I saw, and the greatest, whiter than snow, and in speed like the winds.
2078. And his chariot is cunningly wrought with gold and silver, and armour of gold brought he with him, huge of size, a wonder to behold.
2079. Such armour it beseemeth not that mortal men should wear, but immortal gods.
2080. But bring ye me now to the swift - faring ships, or bind me with a cruel bond and leave me here, that ye may go and make trial of me, whether or no I have spoken to you according to right.
2081. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows, spake to him mighty Diomedes: Nay, I bid thee, Dolon, put no thought of escape in thy heart, even though thou hast brought good tidings, seeing thou hast come into our hands.
2082. For if so be we release thee now or let thee go, yet even hereafter wilt thou come to the swift ships of the Achaeans, either to spy upon us, or to fight in open combat; but if, subdued beneath my hands, thou lose thy life, never again wilt thou prove a bane to the Argives.
2083. He spake, and the other was at point to touch his chin with his stout hand and make entreaty, but Diomedes sprang upon him with his sword and smote him full upon the neck, and shore off both the sinews, and even while he was yet speaking his head was mingled with the dust.
2084. Then from him they stripped the cap of ferret skin from off his head, and the wolf's hide, and the back - bent bow and the long spear, and these things did goodly Odysseus hold aloft in his hand to Athene, the driver of the spoil, and he made prayer, and spake, saying:
2085. Rejoice, goddess, in these, for on thee, first of all the immortals in Olympus, will we call; but send thou us on against the horses and the sleeping - places of the Thracian warriors.
2086. So spake he, and lifted from him the spoils on high, and set them on a tamarisk bush, and set thereby a mark plain to see, gathering handfuls of reeds and luxuriant branches of tamarisk, lest they two might miss the place as they came back through the swift, black night.
2087. But the twain went forward through the arms and the black blood, and swiftly came in their course to the company of the Thracian warriors.
2088. Now these were slumbering, foredone with weariness, and their goodly battle - gear lay by them on the ground, all in due order, in three rows, and hard by each man was his yoke of horses.
2089. But Rhesus slept in the midst, and hard by him his swift horses were tethered by the reins to the topmost rim of the chariot.
2090. Him Odysseus was first to espy, and shewed him to Diomedes: Lo, here, Diomedes, is the man, and here are the horses whereof Dolon, that we slew, told us.
2091. But come now, put forth mighty strength; it beseemeth thee not at all to stand idle with thy weapons; nay, loose the horses; or do thou slay the men, and I will look to the horses.
2092. So spake he, and into the other's heart flashing - eyed Athene breathed might, and he fell to slaving on this side and on that, and from them uprose hideous groaning as they were smitten with the sword, and the earth grew red with blood.
2093. And even as a lion cometh on flocks unshepherded, on goats or on sheep, and leapeth upon them with fell intent, so up and down amid the Thracian warriors went the son of Tydeus until he had slain twelve.
2094. But whomsoever the son of Tydeus drew nigh and smote with the sword, him would Odysseus of the many wiles seize by the foot from behind and drag aside, with this thought in mind, that the fair - maned horses might easily pass through and not be affrighted at heart as they trod over dead men; for they were as yet unused thereto.
2095. But when the son of Tydeus came to the king, him the thirteenth he robbed of honey - sweet life, as he breathed hard, for like to an evil dream there stood above his head that night the son of Oeneus' son, by the devise of Athene.
2096. Meanwhile steadfast Odysseus loosed the single - hooved horses and bound them together with the reins, and drave them forth from the throng, smiting them with his bow, for he had not thought to take in his hands the bright whip from the richly dight car; and he whistled to give a sign to goodly Diomedes.
2097. But he tarried and pondered what most reckless deed he might do, whether to take the chariot, where lay the war-gear richly dight, and draw it out by the pole, or lift it on high and so bear it forth, or whether he should rather take the lives of yet more Thracians.
2098. The while he was pondering this in heart, even then Athene drew nigh and spake to goodly Diomedes: Bethink thee now of returning, son of great - souled Tydeus, to the hollow ships, lest thou go thither in full flight, and haply some other god rouse up the Trojans.
2099. So spake she, and he knew the voice of the goddess as she spoke, and swiftly mounted the horses; and Odysseus smote them with his bow, and they sped toward the swift ships of the Achaeans.
2100. But no blind watch did Apollo of the silver bow keep when he saw Athene attending the son of Tydeus; in wrath against her he entered the great throng of the Trojans, and aroused a counsellor of the Thracians, Hippocoön, the noble kinsman of Rhesus.
2101. And he leapt up out of sleep, and when he saw the place empty where the swift horses had stood, and the men gasping amid gruesome streams of blood, then he uttered a groan, and called by name upon his dear comrade.
2102. And from the Trojans arose a clamour and confusion unspeakable as they hasted together; and they gazed upon the terrible deeds, even all that the warriors had wrought and thereafter gone to the hollow ships.
2103. But when these were now come to the place where they had slain the spy of Hector, then Odysseus, dear to Zeus, stayed the swift horses, and the son of Tydeus leaping to the ground placed the bloody spoils in the hands of Odysseus, and again mounted; and he touched the horses with the lash, and nothing loath the pair sped on to the hollow ships, for there were they fain to be.
2104. And Nestor was first to hear the sound, and he spake, saying:
2105. My frieads, leaders and rulers of the Argives, shall I be wrong, or speak the truth?
2106. Nay, my heart bids me speak.
2107. The sound of swift - footed horses strikes upon mine ears.
2108. I would that Odysseus and the valiant Diomedes may even thus speedily have driven forth from among the Trojans single - hooved horses; but wondrously do I fear at heart lest those bravest of the Argives have suffered some ill through the battle din of the Trojans.
2109. Not yet was the word fully uttered, when they came themselves.
2110. Down they leapt to earth, and the others were seized with joy and welcomed them with hand - clasps and with gentle words.
2111. And the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, was first to question them: Come tell me now, Odysseus, greatly to be praised, great glory of the Achaeans, how ye twain took these horses.
2112. Was it by entering the throng of the Trojans?
2113. Or did some god that met you give you them?
2114. Wondrous like are they to rays of the sun.
2115. Ever do I mingle in battle with the Trojans and nowise methinks do I tarry by the ships, old warrior though I be; howbeit never yet saw I such horses neither thought of such.
2116. Nay, methinks some god hath met you and given you them; for both of you twain doth Zeus the cloud - gatherer love and the daughter of Zeus that beareth the aegis, even flashing - eyed Athene.
2117. Then in answer spake unto him Odysseus of many wiles: Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans, easily might a god that willed it bestow even better horses than these, for the gods are mightier far.
2118. But these horses, old sir, whereof thou askest, are newly come from Thrace, and their lord did brave Diomedes slay, and beside him twelve of his comrades, all them that were the best.
2119. And for the thirteenth we slew a scout near the ships, one that Hector and the other lordly Trojans had sent forth to spy upon our camp.
2120. So spake he, and drave the single - hooved horses through the trench, exultingly, and with him went joyously the rest of the Achaeans.
2121. But when they were come to the well - builded hut of the son of Tydeus, the horses they bound with shapely thongs at the manger where stood the swift - footed horses of Diomedes, eating honey - sweet corn.
2122. And on the stern of his ship did Odysseus place the bloody spoils of Dolon until they should make ready a sacred offering to Athene.
2123. But for themselves they entered the sea and washed away the abundant sweat from shins and necks and thighs.
2124. And when the wave of the sea had washed the abundant sweat from their skin, and their hearts were refreshed, they went into polished baths and bathed.
2125. But when the twain had bathed and anointed them richly with oil, they sate them down at supper, and from the full mixing - bowl they drew off honey - sweet wine and made libation to Athene.
2126. Now Dawn rose from her couch from beside lordly Tithonus, to bring light to immortals and to mortal men; and Zeus sent forth Strife unto the swift ships of the Achaeans, dread Strife, bearing in her hands a portent of war.
2127. And she took her hand by Odysseus' black ship, huge of hull, that was in the midst so that a shout could reach to either end, both to the huts of Aias, son of Telamon, and to those of Achilles; for these had drawn up their shapely ships at the furthermost ends, trusting in their valour and the strength of their hands.
2128. There stood the goddess and uttered a great and terrible shout, a shrill cry of war, and in the heart of each man of the Achaeans she put great strength to war and to fight unceasingly.
2129. And to them forthwith war became sweeter than to return in their hollow ships to their dear native land.
2130. But the son of Atreus shouted aloud, and bade the Argives array them for battle, and himself amid them did on the gleaming bronze.
2131. The greaves first he set about his legs; beautiful they were, and fitted with silver ankle-pieces; next he did on about his chest the corselet that on a time Cinyras had given him for a guest-gift.
2132. For he heard afar in Cyprus the great rumour that the Achaeans were about to sail forth to Troy in their ships, wherefore he gave him the breastplate to do pleasure to the king.
2133. Thereon verily were ten bands of dark cyanus, and twelve of gold, and twenty of tin; and serpents of cyanus writhed up toward the neck, three on either side, like rainbows that the son of Cronos hath set in the clouds, a portent for mortal men.
2134. And about his shoulders he flung his sword, whereon gleamed studs of gold, while the scabbard about it was of silver, fitted with golden chains.
2135. And he took up his richly dight, valorous shield, that sheltered a man on both sides, a fair shield, and round about it were ten circles of bronze, and upon it twenty bosses of tin, gleaming white, and in the midst of them was one of dark cyanus.
2136. And thereon was set as a crown the Gorgon, grim of aspect, glaring terribly, and about her were Terror and Rout.
2137. From the shield was hung a baldric of silver, and thereon writhed a serpent of cyanus, that had three heads turned this way and that, growing forth from one neck.
2138. And upon his head he set his helmet with two horns and with bosses four, with horsehair crest, and terribly did the plume nod from above.
2139. And he took two mighty spears, tipped with bronze; keen they were, and far from him into heaven shone the bronze; and thereat Athene and Hera thundered, doing honour to the king of Mycenae, rich in gold.
2140. Then on his own charioteer each man laid command to hold in his horses well and orderly there at the trench, but themselves on foot, arrayed in their armour, ranged swiftly forward, and a cry unquenchable rose up before the face of Dawn.
2141. Long in advance of the charioteers were they arrayed at the trench, but after them a little space followed the charioteers.
2142. And among them the son of Cronos roused an evil din, and down from on high from out of heaven he sent dew-drops dank with blood, for that he was about to send forth to Hades many a valiant head.
2143. And the Trojans over against them on the rising ground of the plain mustered about great Hector and peerless Polydamas and Aeneas that was honoured of the folk of the Trojans even as a god, and the three sons of Antenor, Polybus and goodly Agenor and young Acamas, like to the immortals.
2144. And Hector amid the foremost bare his shield that was well balanced upon every side.
2145. Even as from amid the clouds there gleameth a baneful star, all glittering, and again it sinketh behind the shadowy clouds, even so Hector would now appear amid the foremost and now amid the hindmost giving them commands; and all in bronze he flashed like the lightning of father Zeus that beareth the aegis.
2146. And as reapers over against each other drive their swathes in a rich man's field of wheat or barley, and the handfuls fall thick and fast; even so the Trojans and Achaeans leapt upon one another and made havoc, nor would either side take thought of ruinous flight; and equal heads had the battle, and they raged like wolves.
2147. And Strife, that is fraught with many groanings, was glad as she looked thereon; for alone of the gods she was with them in their fighting; whereas the other gods were not among them, but abode in peace in their own halls, where for each one a fair palace was builded amid the folds of Olympus.
2148. And all were blaming the son of Cronos, lord of the dark clouds, for that he willed to give glory to the Trojans.
2149. Howbeit of them the father recked not; but aloof from the others he sat apart exulting in his glory, looking upon the city of the Trojans, and the ships of the Achaeans, on the flashing of the bronze, and on the slayers and the slain.
2150. Now as long as it was morn and the sacred day was waxing, so long the missiles of either side struck home, and the folk kept falling; but at the hour when a woodman maketh ready his meal in the glades of a mountain, when his arms are grown tired with felling tall trees, and weariness cometh upon his soul, and desire of sweet food seizeth his heart, even then the Danaans by their valour brake the battalions, calling to their fellows through the lines.
2151. And among them Agamemnon rushed forth the first and slew a warrior, Bienor, shepherd of the host, — himself and after him his comrade, Oïleus, driver of horses.
2152. Oïleus verily leapt down from his chariot and stood and faced him, but even as he rushed straight upon him the king smote him on the forehead with his sharp spear, nor was the spear stayed by his helm, heavy with bronze, but passed through it and through the bone, and all his brain was spattered about within; so stayed he him in his fury.
2153. These then did Agamemnon, king of men, leave there, gleaming with their naked breasts, when he had stripped off their tunics, and went on to slay Isus and Antiphus, two sons of Priam, one a bastard and one born in wedlock, the twain being in one car: the bastard the reins, but glorious Antiphus stood by his side to fight.
2154. These twain had Achilles on a time bound with fresh withes amid the spurs of Ida, taking them as they were herding their sheep, and had set them free for a ransom.
2155. But now the son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon, struck Isus on the breast above the nipple with a cast of his spear, and Antiphus he smote hard by the ear with his sword, and cast him from the chariot.
2156. Then he made haste to strip from the twain their goodly battle - gear, knowing them full well, for he had seen them before by the swift ships, when Achilles, fleet of foot brought them from Ida.
2157. And as a lion easily crusheth the little ones of a swift hind, when he hath seized them with his strong teeth, and hath come to their lair, and taketh from them their tender life, — and the mother, though she chance to be very near, cannot succour them, for on herself too cometh dread trembling, and swiftly she darteth through the thick brush and the woodland, hasting and sweating before the onset of the mighty beast; even so was no one of the Trojans able to ward off destruction from these twain, but themselves were driven in flight before the Argives.
2158. Then took he Peisander and Hippolochus, staunch in fight.
2159. Sons were they of wise - hearted Antimachus, who above all others in hope to receive gold from Alexander, goodly gifts, would not suffer that Helen be given back to fair - haired Menelaus.
2160. His two sons lord Agamemnon took, the twain being in one car, and together were they seeking to drive the swift horses, for the shining reins had slipped from their hands, and the two horses were running wild; but he rushed against them like a lion, the son of Atreus, and the twain made entreaty to him from the car:
2161. Take us alive, thou son of Atreus, and accept a worthy ransom; treasures full many he stored in the palace of Antimachus, bronze and gold and iron, wrought with toil; thereof would our father grant thee ransom past counting, should he hear that we are alive at the ships of the Achaeans.
2162. So with weeping the twain spake unto the king with gentle words, but all ungentle was the voice they heard:
2163. If ye are verily the sons of wise - hearted Antimachus, who on a time in the gathering of the Trojans, when Menelaus had come on an embassage with godlike Odysseus, bade slay him then and there, neither suffer him to return to the Achaeans, now of a surety shall ye pay the price of your father's foul outrage.
2164. He spake, and thrust Peisander from his chariot to the ground, smiting him with his spear upon the breast, and backward was he hurled upon the earth.
2165. But Hippolochus leapt down, and him he slew upon the ground, and shearing off his arms with the sword, and striking off his head, sent him rolling, like a round stone, amid the throng.
2166. These then he let be, but where chiefly the battalions were being driven in rout, there leapt he in, and with him other well - greaved Achaeans.
2167. Footmen were ever slaying footmen as they fled perforce, and horsemen horse - men — and from beneath them uprose from the plain the dust which the thundering hooves of horses stirred up — and they wrought havoc with the bronze.
2168. And lord Agamemnon, ever slaying, followed after, calling to the Argives.
2169. And as when consuming fire falls upon thick woodland, and the whirling wind beareth it everywhither, and the thickets fall utterly as they are assailed by the onrush of the fire; even so beneath Agamemon, son of Atreus, fell the heads of the Trojans as they fled, and many horses with high - arched necks rattled empty cars along the dykes of battle, lacking their peerless charioteers, who were lying upon the ground dearer far to the vultures than to their wives.
2170. But Hector did Zeus draw forth from the missiles and the dust, from the man-slaying and the blood and the din; but the son of Atreus followed after, calling fiercely to the Danaans.
2171. And past the tomb of ancient Ilos, son of Dardanus, over the midst of the plain, past the wild fig-tree they sped, striving to win to the city, and ever did the son of Atreus follow shouting, and with gore were his invincible hands bespattered.
2172. But when they were come to the Scaean gates and the oak - tree, there then the two hosts halted and awaited each the other.
2173. Howbeit some were still being driven in rout over the midst of the plain like kine that a lion hath scattered, coming upon them in the dead of night; all hath he scattered, but to one appeareth sheer destruction; her neck he seizeth first in his strong teeth and breaketh it and thereafter devoureth the blood and all the inward parts: even in like manner did lord Agamemnon, son of Atreus, follow hard upon the Trojans, ever slaying the hindmost, and they were driven in rout.
2174. And many fell from their chariots upon their faces or upon their backs beneath the hands of Atreus' son, for around and before him he raged with his spear.
2175. But when he was now about to come beneath the city and the steep wall, then, verily, the father of men and gods came down from heaven, and sate him down on the peaks of many - fountained Ida; and in his hands he held the thunder - bolt.
2176. And he sent forth golden - winged Iris to bear his message:
2177. Up go, swift Iris, and declare this word unto Hector:
2178. So long as he shall see Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, raging amid the fore - most fighters, laying waste the ranks of men, so long let him hold back, and bid the rest of the host fight with the foe in the fierce conflict.
2179. But when, either wounded by a spear-thrust or smitten by an arrow, Agamemnon shall leap upon his chariot, then will I vouchsafe strength to Hector to slay and slay until he come to the well - benched ships, and the sun sets and sacred darkness cometh on.
2180. So spake he, and wind - footed swift Iris failed not to hearken, but went down from the hills of Ida to sacred Ilios.
2181. She found the son of wise - hearted Priam, goodly Hector, standing in his jointed car; and swift - footed Iris drew nigh him and spake unto him, saying: Hector, son of Priam, peer of Zeus in counsel, Zeus the father hath sent me forth to declare to thee this message.
2182. So long as thou shalt see Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, raging amid the foremost fighters, laying waste the ranks of men, so long do thou give place from battle, but bid the rest of the host fight with the foe in the fierce conflict.
2183. But when either wounded by a spear-thrust or smitten with an arrow Agamemnon shall leap upon his chariot, then will Zeus vouchsafe strength to thee to slay and slay until thou come to the well - benched ships, and the sun sets and sacred darkness cometh on.
2184. When she had thus spoken swift - footed Iris departed; and Hector leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground, and brandishing his two sharp spears went everywhere throughout the host, urging them to fight, and roused the dread din of battle.
2185. So they rallied, and took their stand with their faces toward the Achaeans, and the Argives over against them made strong their battalions.
2186. And the battle was set in array, and they stood over against each other, and among them Agamemnon rushed forth the first, and was minded to fight far in advance of all.
2187. Tell me now, ye Muses, that have dwellings on Olympus, who it was that first came to face Agamemnon, either of the Trojans themselves or of their famed allies.
2188. It was Iphidamas, son of Antenor, a valiant man and tall, that was nurtured in deep-soiled Thrace, mother of flocks, and Cisseus reared him in his house while he was yet but a little child, even his mother's father, that begat fair - cheeked Theano.
2189. But when he came to the measure of glorious youth he sought to keep him there, and offered him his own daughter; howbeit, a bridegroom newly wed, forth from his bridal chamber he went after the rumour of the coming of the Achaeans, with twelve beaked ships that followed him.
2190. Now these he had left at Percote, the shapely ships, but himself had come by land to Ilios; he it was that now came to face Agamemnon, son of Atreus.
2191. And when they were come near as they advanced one against the other, the son of Atreus missed, and his spear was turned aside, but Iphidamas stabbed him on the girdle beneath the corselet, and put his weight into the thrust, trusting in his heavy hand; howbeit he pierced not the flashing girdle, for long ere that the spear-point struck the silver, and was bent like lead.
2192. Then wide - ruling Agamamnon seized the spear in his hand and drew it toward him furiously like a lion, and pulled it from the hand of Iphidamas, and smote him on the neck with his sword and loosed his limbs.
2193. So there he fell, and slept a sleep of bronze, unhappy youth, far from his wedded wife, bearing aid to his townsfolk — far from the bride of whom he had known no joy, yet much had he given for her; first he gave an hundred kine, and thereafter promised a thousand, goats and sheep together, which were herded for him in flocks past counting.
2194. Then did Agamemnon, son of Atreus, strip him and went through the throng of the Achaeans bearing his goodly armour.
2195. But when Coön, pre-eminent among warriors, eldest son of Antenor, marked him, strong grief enfolded his eyes for his brother's fall, and he took his stand on one side with his spear, unseen of goodly Agamemnon, and stabbed him full upon the arm below the elbow, and clean through went the point of the shining spear.
2196. Thereat shuddered Agamemnon king of men, yet even so he ceased not from battle and war, but, wind - nurtured spear in hand, leapt upon Coön.
2197. Now he was eagerly drawing by the foot Iphidamas, his own brother, begotten of the one father, and was calling upon all the bravest, but even as he dragged him through the throng Agamemnon smote him with a thrust of his bronze - shod spear beneath his bossed shield, and loosed his limbs; and he drew near and struck off his head over Iphidamas.
2198. There then the sons of Antenor beneath the hands of the king, the son of Atreus, fulfilled the measure of their fate, and went down to the house of Hades.
2199. But Agamemnon ranged along the ranks of the other warriors with spear and sword and great stones, so long as the blood welled yet warm from his wound.
2200. But when the wound waxed dry, and the blood ceased to flow, then sharp pains came upon the mighty son of Atreus.
2201. And even as when the sharp dart striketh a woman in travail, the piercing dart that the Eilithyiae, the goddesses of childbirth, send — even the daughters of Hera that have in their keeping bitter pangs; even so sharp pains came upon the mighty son of Atreus.
2202. Then he leapt upon his chariot and bade his charioteer drive to the hollow ships, for he was sore pained at heart.
2203. And he uttered a piercing shout, and called to the Danaans:
2204. My friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, do ye now ward from the seafaring ships the grievous din of battle, for Zeus the counsellor suffereth me not to war the whole day through against the Trojans.
2205. So spake he, and the charioteer lashed the fair - maned horses towards the hollow ships, and nothing loath the pair sped onward.
2206. With foam were their breasts flecked, and with dust their bellies stained beneath them as they bore the wounded king forth from the battle.
2207. But when Hector saw Agamemnon departing, to Trojans and Lycians he called with a loud shout: Ye Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians that fight in close combat, be men, my friends, and bethink you of furious valour.
2208. Gone is the best of the men, and to me hath Zeus, son of Cronos granted great glory.
2209. Nay, drive your single - hooved horses straight towards the valiant Danaans, that ye may win the glory of victory.
2210. So saving he aroused the strength and spirit of every man.
2211. And even as when a huntsman sets his white - toothed hounds upon a wild boar or a lion, so upon the Achaeans did Hector, son of Priam, peer of Ares, the bane of mortals, set the great-souled Trojans.
2212. Himself with high heart he strode among the foremost, and fell upon the conflict like a blustering tempest, that leapeth down and lasheth to fury the violet-hued deep.
2213. Who then was first to be slain, and who last by Hector, Priam's son, when Zeus vouchsafed him glory?
2214. Asaeus first, and Autonous, and Opites and Dolops, son of Clytius, and Opheltius, and Agelaus, and Aesymnus, and Orus, and Hipponous, staunch in fight.
2215. These leaders of the Danaans he slew and thereafter fell upon the multitude, and even as when the West Wind driveth the clouds of the white South Wind, smiting them with a violent squall, and many a swollen wave rolleth onward, and on high the spray is scattered beneath the blast of the wandering wind; even so many heads of the host were laid low by Hector.
2216. Then had ruin come, and deeds beyond remedy been wrought, and now would the Achaeans in flight have flung themselves upon their ships, had not Odysseus called to Diomedes, son of Tydeus: Tydeus' son, what has come over us that we have forgotten our furious valour?
2217. Nay, come thou hither, good friend, and take thy stand by my side, for verily shame will it be if Hector of the flashing helm shall take the ships.
2218. Then in answer to him spake mighty Diomedes:
2219. Of a surety will I abide and endure, howbeit but for scant space shall be our profit, for Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, plainly willeth to give victory to the Trojans rather than to us.
2220. He spake, and thrust Thymbraeus from his chariot to the ground, smiting him with his spear on the left breast, and Odysseus smote Molion, the godlike squire of that prince.
2221. These then they let be, when they had made them cease from war; but the twain ranged throughout the throng, making havoc of it, as when two boars with high hearts fall upon hunting hounds; even so they turned again upon the Trojans and slew them, and the Achaeans gladly had respite in their flight before goodly Hector.
2222. Then took they a chariot and two men, the best of their people, sons twain of Merops of Percote, that was above all men skilled in prophesying, and would not suffer his sons to go into war, the bane of men; but the twain would in no wise hearken to him, for the fates of black death were leading them on.
2223. These did the son of Tydeus, Diomedes, famed for his spear, rob of spirit and of life, and took from them their goodly battle - gear.
2224. And Odysseus slew Hippodamus and Hypeirochus.
2225. Then the son of Cronos stretched evenly for them the line of battle, as he looked down from Ida, and they kept slaying one another.
2226. Tydeus' son wounded the warrior Agastrophus, son of Paeon, on the hip with a thrust of his spear; nor were his horses near at hand for him to flee, but he was greatly blinded at heart;, for his squire held the horses withdrawn apart, and he on foot was raging amid the foremost fighters until he lost his life.
2227. But Hector was quick to mark them across the ranks, and rushed upon them, shouting, and with him followed the battalions of the Trojans.
2228. At sight of him Diomedes, good at the war-cry, shuddered, and forthwith spake to Odysseus that was near:
2229. On us twain is this ruin rolling, even mighty Hector; but come, let us stand, and ward off his onset abiding where we are.
2230. He spake and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled it, nor missed he the mark at which he aimed, but smote him on the head, on the top of the helmet, but the bronze was turned aside by bronze, and reached not his fair flesh, for it was stayed by the threefold crested helm, which Phoebus Apollo had bestowed upon him.
2231. But Hector sprang back a wondrous way, and mingled with the throng, and he fell upon his knees and thus abode, and with his stout hand leaned upon the earth, and dark night enfolded his eyes.
2232. But while the son of Tydeus was following after the cast of his spear far through the foremost fighters, where he had seen it fix itself in the earth, meanwhile Hector revived again, and leaping back into his chariot drave forth into the throng, and escaped black fate.
2233. And rushing after him with his spear mighty Diomedes spake to him:
2234. Now again, thou dog, art thou escaped from death, though verily thy bane came nigh thee; but once more hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to whom of a surety thou must make prayer whenso thou goest amid the hurtling of spears.
2235. Verily I will yet make an end of thee when I meet thee hereafter, if so be any god is helper to me likewise.
2236. But now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I may light upon.
2237. So spake he, and went on to strip of his armour the son of Paeon, famed for his spear.
2238. But Alexander, lord of fair - haired Helen, aimed an arrow at Tydeus' son, shepherd of the host, leaning the while against a pillar on the barrow that men's hands reared for Ilus, son of Dardanus, an elder of the people in days of old.
2239. Now Diomedes was stripping the gleaming corselet of valiant Agastrophus from about his breast, and the shield from off his shoulder, and his heavy helm, when Paris drew the centre- piece of the bow and smote him — for not in vain did the shaft speed from his hand — upon the flat of the right foot, and the arrow passed clean through and fixed itself in the ground; and with a right merry laugh Paris leapt up from his lair and spake vauntingly:
2240. Thou art smitten, not in vain hath my shaft sped; would that I had smitten thee in the nethermost belly, and taken away thy life.
2241. So would the Trojans have had respite from their woe, who now tremble before thee as bleating goats before a lion.
2242. But with no touch of fear mighty Diomedes spake to him: Bowman, reviler, proud of thy curling locks, thou ogler of girls !
2243. O that thou wouldst make trial of me man to man in armour, then would thy bow and thy swift - falling arrows help thee not; whereas now having but grazed the flat of my foot thou boastest vainly.
2244. I reck not thereof, any more than if a woman had struck me or a witless child, for blunt is the dart of one that is a weakling and a man of naught.
2245. Verily in other wise when sped by my hand, even though it do but touch, does the spear prove its edge, and forthwith layeth low its man; torn then with wailing are the two cheeks of his wife, and his children fatherless, while he, reddening the earth with his blood, rotteth away, more birds than women around him.
2246. So spake he, and to him did Odysseus, famed for his spear, draw nigh, and take his stand before him, and Diomedes sat down behind him, and drew forth the sharp arrow from his foot, and a sore pang shot through his flesh.
2247. Then leapt he upon his chariot and bade his charioteer drive to the hollow ships, for he was sore pained at heart.
2248. Now Odysseus famed for his spear, was left alone, nor did anyone of the Argives abide by him, for that fear had laid hold of them all.
2249. Then mightily moved he spake unto his own great-hearted spirit:
2250. Woe is me; what is to befall me?
2251. Great evil were it if I flee, seized with fear of the throng;, yet this were a worse thing, if I be taken all alone, for the rest of the Danaans hath the son of Cronos scattered in flight.
2252. But why doth my heart thus hold converse with me?
2253. For I know that they are cowards that depart from battle, whereas whoso is pre-eminent in fight, him verily it behoveth to hold his ground boldly, whether he be smitten, or smite another.
2254. While he pondered thus in mind and heart, meanwhile the ranks of the shield - bearing Trojans came on and hemmed him in the midst, setting among them their own bane.
2255. And even as hounds and lusty youths press upon a boar on this side and on that, and he cometh forth from the deep thicket, whetting his white tusks in his curving jaws, and they charge upon him on either side, and thereat ariseth the sound of the gnashing of tusks; but forthwith they abide his onset, how dread soever he be; even so then around Odysseus, dear to Zeus, did the Trojans press.
2256. But first he smote peerless Deïopites from above in the shoulder, leaping upon him with sharp spear; and thereafter he slew Thoön and Eunomus, and then Chersidamas as he leapt down from his car he stabbed with his spear upon the navel beneath his bossed shield; and he fell in the dust and clutched the ground with his palm.
2257. These then he let be, but smote Charops, son of Hippasus, with a thrust of his spear, even the own brother of wealthy Socus.
2258. And to bear him aid came Socus, a godlike man; close to Odysseus he came, and took his stand, and he spake, saying:
2259. Odysseus, greatly to be praised, insatiate in wiles and in toil, this day shalt thou either boast over both the sons of Hippasus, for that thou hast slain two such warriors and stripped them of their armour, or else smitten by my spear shalt thou lose thy life.
2260. So saying, he smote upon his shield that was well balanced upon every side.
2261. Through the bright shield went the mighty spear, and through the corselet, richly dight, did it force its way, and all the flesh it tore from his side; but Pallas Athene suffered it not to pierce the bowels of the warrior.
2262. And Odysseus knew that the spear had in no wise lighted on a fatal spot, and he drew back and spake to Socus, saying:
2263. Ah wretch, of a surety is sheer destruction come upon thee.
2264. Verily hast thou made me to cease from warring against the Trojans; but upon thee I deem that here this day death and black fate shall come, and that vanquished beneath my spear thou shalt yield glory to me, and thy soul to Hades of the goodly steeds.
2265. He spake, and the other turned back and started to flee, but even as he turned Odysseus fixed the spear in his back between the shoulders, and drave it through his breast.
2266. And he fell with a thud, and goodly Odysseus exulted over him: Ah Socus, son of wise - hearted Hippasus, tamer of horses, the end of death has been too quick in coming upon thee; thou hast not escaped it.
2267. Ah poor wretch, thy father and queenly mother shall not close thine eyes in death, but the birds that eat raw flesh shall rend thee, beating their wings thick and fast about thee; whereas to me, if I die, the goodly Achaeans shall give burial.
2268. So saying he drew the mighty spear of wise - hearted Socus forth from his flesh and from his bossed shield, and when it was drawn out the blood gushed forth and distressed his spirit.
2269. But the great-souled Trojans, when they beheld the blood of Odysseus, called one to another through the throng and made at him all together.
2270. But he gave ground, and shouted to his comrades; thrice shouted he then loud as a man's head can shout, and thrice did Menelaus, dear to Ares, hear his call, and forthwith he spake to Aias that was nigh at hand: Aias, sprung from Zeus, thou son of Telamon, captain of the host, in mine ears rang the cry of Odysseus, of the steadfast heart, like as though the Trojans had cut him off in the fierce conflict and were over - powering him alone as he is.
2271. Nay, come, let us make our way through the throng; to bear him aid is the better course.
2272. I fear lest some evil befall him, alone mid the Trojans, valiant though he be, and great longing for him come upon the Danaans.
2273. So saying he led the way, and Aias followed, a godlike man.
2274. Then found they Odysseus, dear to Zeus and round about the Trojans beset him, as tawny jackals in the mountains about a horned stag that hath been wounded, that a man hath smitten with an arrow from the string; from him the stag hath escaped and fleeth swiftly so long as the blood flows warm and his knees are quick, but when at length the swift arrow overpowereth him, then ravening jackals rend him amid the mountains in a shadowy grove; but lo, God bringeth against them a murderous lion, and the jackals scatter in flight, and he rendeth the prey: even so then did the Trojans, many and valiant, beset Odysseus round about, the wise and crafty - minded; but the warrior darting forth with his spear warded off the pitiless day of doom.
2275. Then Aias drew near, bearing his shield that was like a city wall, and stood forth beside him, and the Trojans scattered in flight, one here, one there.
2276. And warlike Menelaus led Odysseus forth from the throng, holding him by the hand, till his squire drave up the horses and car.
2277. Then Aias leapt upon the Trojans and slew Doryclus, bastard son of Priam, and after him smote Pandocus with a thrust, and likewise Lysander and Pyrasus and Pylartes.
2278. And as when a river in flood cometh down upon a plain, a winter torrent from the mountains, driven on by the rain of Zeus, and many a dry oak and many a pine it beareth in its course, and much drift it casteth into the sea; even so glorious Aias charged tumultuously over the plain on that day, slaying horses and men.
2279. Nor did Hector as yet know aught thereof, for he was fighting on the left of all the battle by the banks of the river Scamander, where chiefly the heads of warriors were falling, and a cry unquenchable arose, round about great Nestor and warlike Idomeneus.
2280. With these had Hector dalliance, and terrible deeds he wrought with the spear and in horsemanship, and he laid waste the battalions of the young men.
2281. Yet would the goodly Achaeans in no wise have given ground from their course, had not Alexander, the lord of fair - haired Helen, stayed Machaon, shepherd of the host, in the midst of his valorous deeds, and smitten him on the right shoulder with a three - barbed arrow.
2282. Then sorely did the Achaeans breathing might fear for him, lest haply men should slay him in the turning of the fight.
2283. And forthwith Idomeneus spake to goodly Nestor: Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans, come, get thee upon thy chariot, and let Machaon mount beside thee, and swiftly do thou drive to the ships thy single- hooved horses.
2284. For a leech is of the worth of many other men for the cutting out of arrows and the spreading of soothing simples.
2285. So spake he, and the horseman, Nestor of Gerenia, failed not to hearken.
2286. Forthwith he got him upon his chariot, and beside him mounted Machaon, the son of Asclepius the peerless leech; and he touched the horses with the lash, and nothing loath the pair sped on to the hollow ships, for there were they fain to be.
2287. But Cebriones beheld the Trojans being driven in rout, as he stood by Hector's side in his chariot, and he spake to him, saying:
2288. Hector, we twain have dalliance with the Danaans here, on the skirts of dolorous war, whereas the other Trojans are driven in rout confusedly, both horses and men.
2289. And it is Aias, son of Telamon, that driveth them; well do I know him, for wide is the shield he hath about his shoulders.
2290. Nay, let us too drive thither our horses and car, where most of all horsemen and footmen, vying in evil rivalry, are slaying one another, and the cry goes up unquenchable.
2291. So saying he smote the fair - maned horses with the shrill - sounding lash, and they, feeling the blow, fleetly bare the swift car amid the Trojans and Achaeans, trampling on the dead and on the shields, and with blood was all the axle sprinkled beneath, and the rims round about the car, with the drops that smote upon them from the horses' hooves and from the tires.
2292. And Hector was eager to enter the throng of muen, to leap in and shatter it, and an evil din of war he sent among the Danaans, and scant rest did he give his spear.
2293. Nay, he ranged among the ranks of the other warriors with spear and sword and with great stones; only he avoided battle with Aias, son of Telamon.
2294. Now father Zeus, throned on high, roused Aias to flight, and he stood in a daze, and on his back he cast his sevenfold shield of bull's-hide, and with an anxious glance toward the throng he gave way, like a wild beast, ever turning him about and retreating slowly step by step.
2295. And even as a tawny lion is driven from the fold of the kine by dogs and country folk, that suffer him not to seize the fattest of the herd, watching the whole night through, but he in his lust for flesh goeth straight on, yet accomplisheth naught thereby, for thick the darts fly to meet him, hurled by bold hands, and blazing brands withal, before which he quaileth, how eager soever he be, and at dawn he departeth with sullen heart; so Aias then gave way before the Trojans sullen at heart, and sorely against his will, for exceedingly did he fear for the ships of the Achaeans.
2296. And as when an ass that passeth by a cornfield getteth the better of boys — a lazy ass about whose ribs many a cudgel is broken, and he goeth in and wasteth the deep grain, and the boys beat him with cudgels, though their might is but puny, and hardly do they drive him forth when he hath had his fill of fodder; even so then did the Trojans, high of heart, and their allies, gathered from many lands, smite great Aias, son of Telamon, with spears full upon his shield, and ever press upon him.
2297. And Aias would now be mindful of his furious valour, and wheeling upon them would hold back the battalions of the horse - taming Trojans, and now again he would turn him to flee.
2298. But he barred them all from making way to the swift ships, and himself stood between Trojans and Achaeans, battling furiously.
2299. And the spears hurled by bold hands were some of them lodged in his great shield, as they sped onward, and many, ere ever they reached his white body, stood fixed midway in the earth, fain to glut themselves with flesh.
2300. But when Euaemon's glorious son, Eurypylus, saw him oppressed by thick - flying missiles, he came and stood by his side and hurled with his shining spear, and smote Apisaon, son of Phausius, shepherd of the host, in the liver below the midriff, and straightway loosed his knees; and Eurypylus leapt upon him and set him to strip the harness from his shoulders.
2301. But when godlike Alexander marked him stripping the harness from Apisaon, forthwith he drew his bow against Eurypylus, and smote him with an arrow on the right thigh; and the reed of the arrow brake, yet was his thigh made heavy.
2302. Then back he shrank into the throng of his comrades, avoiding fate, and he uttered a piercing shout, and called to the Danaans:
2303. My friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, turn ye and stand, and ward off the pitiless day of doom from Aias who is oppressed with missiles; nor do I deem that he will escape from dolorous war.
2304. Nay verily, stand ye and face the foe about great Aias, son of Telamon.
2305. So spake the wounded Eurypylus, and they came and stood close beside him, leaning their shields against their shoulders and holding their spears on high; and toward them came Aias, and turned and stood when he had reached the throng of his comrades.
2306. So fought they like unto blazing fire; but the mares of Neleus, all bathed in sweat, bare Nestor forth from the battle, and bare also Machaon, shepherd of the host.
2307. And swift - footed goodly Achilles beheld and marked him, for Achilles was standing by the stern of his ship, huge of hull, gazing upon the utter toil of battle and the tearful rout.
2308. And forthwith he spake to his comrade Patroclus, calling to him from beside the ship; and he heard, and came forth from the hut like unto Ares; and this to him was the beginning of evil.
2309. Then the valiant son of Menoetius spake the first: Wherefore dost thou call me, Achilles?
2310. What need hast thou of me?
2311. And in answer to him spake Achilles, swift of foot: Goodly son of Menoetius, dear to this heart of mine, now methinks will the Achaeans be standing about my knees in prayer, for need has come upon them that may no longer be borne.
2312. Yet go now, Patroclus, dear to Zeus, and ask Nestor who it is that he bringeth wounded from out the war.
2313. Of a truth from behind he seemeth in all things like Machaon, son of Asclepius, but I saw not the eyes of the man, for the horses darted by me, speeding eagerly onward.
2314. So spake he, and Patroclus gave ear to his dear comrade, and went running along the huts and the ships of the Achaeans.
2315. But when those others were come to the hut of the son of Neleus, they stepped forth upon the bounteous earth, and Eurymedon the squire loosed old Nestor's horses from the car, and the twain dried the sweat from their tunics standing in the breeze by the shore of the sea; and thereafter they went into the hut and sate them down on chairs.
2316. And for them fair - tressed Hecamede mixed a potion, she that old Nestor had taken from out of Tenedos, when Achilles sacked it, the daughter of great-hearted Arsinous; for the Achaeans had chosen her out for him, for that in counsel he was ever best of all.
2317. She first drew before the twain a table, fair, with feet of cyanus, and well - polished, and set thereon a basket of bronze, and therewith an onion, a relish for their drink, and pale honey, and ground meal of sacred barley; and beside them a beauteous cup, that the old man had brought from home, studded with bosses of gold; four were the handles thereof, and about each twain doves were feeding, while below were two supports.
2318. Another man could scarce have availed to lift that cup from the table, when it was full, but old Nestor would raise it right easily.
2319. Therein the woman, like to the goddesses, mixed a potion for them with Pramnian wine, and on this she grated cheese of goat's milk with a brazen grater, and sprinkled thereover white barley meal; and she bade them drink, when she had made ready the potion.
2320. Then when the twain had drunk, and sent from them parching thirst, they took delight in tales, speaking each to the other; and lo, Patroclus stood at the doors, a godlike man.
2321. At sight of him the old man sprang from his bright chair, and took him by the hand and led him in, and bade him be seated.
2322. But Patroclus from over against him refused, and spake, saying: I may not sit, old sir, fostered of Zeus, nor wilt thou persuade me.
2323. Revered and to be dreaded is he who sent me forth to learn who it is that thou bringest home wounded.
2324. But even of myself I know, and behold Machaon, shepherd of the host.
2325. And now will I go back again a messenger, to bear word to Achilles.
2326. Well knowest thou, old sir, fostered of Zeus, of what sort is he, dread man; lightly would he blame even one in whom was no blame.
2327. Then made answer the horseman Nestor of Gerenia: Wherefore now doth Achilles thus have pity for the sons of the Achaeans, as many as have been smitten with missiles?
2328. Nor knoweth he at all what grief hath arisen throughout the camp; for the best men lie among the ships smitten by darts or wounded with spear-thrusts.
2329. Smitten is the son of Tydeus, mighty Diomedes, wounded with spearthrust is Odysseus, famed for his spear, and Agamemnon, and smitten is Eurypylus too with an arrow in the thigh, and this man beside have I but now borne forth from the war smitten with an arrow from the string.
2330. Yet Achilles, valiant though he be, careth not for the Danaans, neither hath pity.
2331. Doth he wait until the swift ships hard by the sea, in despite of the Argives, shall blaze with consuming fire, and ourselves be slain man after man?
2332. For my strength is not such as of old it was in my supple limbs.
2333. Would that I were young and my strength were as when strife was set afoot between the Eleans and our folk about the lifting of kine, what time I slew Itymoneus, the valiant son of Hypeirochus, a man that dwelt in Elis, when I was driving off what we had seized in reprisal; and he while fighting for the kine was smitten amid the foremost by a spear from my hand; and he fell, and the country folk about him fled in terror.
2334. And booty exceeding great did we drive together from out the plain, fifty herds of kine, as many flocks of sheep, as many droves of swine, as many roving herds of goats, and chestnut horses an hundred and fifty, all mares, and many of them had foals at the teat.
2335. These then we drave into Neleian Pylos by night into the citadel, and Neleus was glad at heart for that much spoil had fallen to me when going as a stripling into war.
2336. And heralds made loud proclamation at break of dawn that all men should come to whomsoever a debt was owing in goodly Elis; and they that were leaders of the Pylians gathered together and made division, for to many did the Epeians owe a debt, seeing that we in Pylos were few and oppressed.
2337. For mighty Heracles had come and oppressed us in the years that were before, and all that were our bravest had been slain.
2338. Twelve were we that were sons of peerless Neleus, and of these I alone was left, and all the rest had perished; wherefore the brazen - coated Epeans, proud of heart thereat, in wantonness devised mischief against us.
2339. And from out the spoil old Neleus chose him a herd of kine and a great flock of sheep, choosing three hundred and their herdsman with them.
2340. For to him a great debt was owing in goodly Elis, even our horses, winners of prizes, with their car, that had gone to the games, for they were to race for a tripod; but Augeias, king of men, kept them there, and sent back their driver, sorrowing for his horses.
2341. By reason of these things, both deeds and words, was the old man wroth and chose him recompense past telling; and the rest he gave to the people to divide, that so far as in him lay no man might go defrauded of an equal share.
2342. So we were disposing of all that there was, and round about the city were offering sacrifice to the gods; and on the third day the Epeians came all together, many men and single - hooved horses, with all speed, and among them the two Moliones did on their battle - gear, though they were as yet but stripligs unskilled in furious valour.
2343. Now there is a city Thryoessa, a steep hill, far off on the Alpheius, the nethermost of sandy Pylos; about this they set their camp, fain to raze it utterly.
2344. But when they had coursed over the whole plain to us came Athene, speeding down from Olympus by night with the message that we should array us for battle, and nowise loath were the folk she gathered in Pylos, but right eager for war.
2345. Now Neleus would not suffer me to arm myself, but hid away my horses, for he deemed that as yet I knew naught of deeds of war.
2346. Howbeit even so I was pre-eminent among our horsemen, on foot though I was, for so did Athene order the fight.
2347. There is a river Minyeïus that empties into the sea hard by Arene, where we waited for bright Dawn, we the horsemen of the Pylians, and the throngs of footmen flowed ever after.
2348. Thence with all speed, arrayed in our armour, we came at midday to the sacred stream of Alpheius.
2349. There we sacrificed goodly victims to Zeus, supreme in might, and a bull to Alpheius, and a bull to Poseidon, but to flashing - eyed Athene a heifer of the herd; and thereafter we took supper throughout the host by companies, and laid us down to sleep, each man in his battlegear, about the streams of the river.
2350. But the great-souled Epeians were marshalled about the city, fain to raze it utterly; but ere that might be there appeared unto them a mighty deed of war; for when the bright sun stood above the earth we made prayer to Zeus and Athene, and joined battle.
2351. But when the strife of the Pylians and Epeians began, I was first to slay my man, and to get me his single - hooved horses — even the spearman Mulius; son by marriage was he of Augeias, and had to wife his eldest daughter, fair - haired Agamede, who knew all simples that the wide earth nourisheth.
2352. Him as he came against me I smote with may bronze - tipped spear, and he fell in the dust; but I leapt upon his chariot and took my stand amid the foremost fighters.
2353. But the great-souled Epeians fled one here, one there, when they saw the man fallen, even him that was leader of the horsemen and preeminent in fight.
2354. But I sprang upon them like a black tempest and fifty chariots I took, and about each one two warriors bit the ground, quelled by my spear.
2355. And now had I slain the two Moliones, of the blood of Actor, but that their father, the wide - ruling Shaker of Earth, saved them from war, and shrouded them in thick mist.
2356. Then Zeus vouchsafed great might to the men of Pylos, for so long did we follow through the wide plain, slaying the men and gathering their goodly battle - gear, even till we drave our horses to Buprasium, rich in wheat, and the rock of Olen and the place where is the hill called the hill of Alesium, whence Athene again turned back the host.
2357. Then I slew the last man, and left him; but the Achaeans drave back their swift horses from Buprasium to Pylos, and all gave glory among the gods to Zeus, and to Nestor among men.
2358. Of such sort was I among warriors, as sure as ever I was.
2359. But Achilles would alone have profit of his valour.
2360. Nay, verily, methinks he will bitterly lament hereafter, when the folk perisheth.
2361. Ah, friend, of a surety Menoetius thus laid charge upon thee on the day when he sent thee forth from Phthia to Agamemnon.
2362. And we twain were within, I and goodly Odysseus, and in the halls we heard all things, even as he gave thee charge.
2363. For we had come to the well - builded house of Peleus, gathering the host throughout the bounteous land of Achaia.
2364. There then we found in the house the warrior Menoetius and thee, and with you Achilles; and the old man Peleus, driver of chariots, was burning the fat thighs of a bull to Zeus that hurleth the thunderbolt, in the enclosure of the court, and he held in his hand a golden cup, pouring forth the flaming wine to accompany the burning offerings.
2365. Ye twain were busied about the flesh of the bull, and lo, we stood in the doorway; and Achilles, seized with wonder, sprang up, and took us by the hand and led us in, and bade us be seated, and he set before us abundant entertainment, all that is the due of strangers.
2366. But when we had had our fill of food and drink, I was first to speak, and bade you follow with us; and ye were both right eager, and those twain laid on you many commands.
2367. Old Peleus bade his son Achilles ever be bravest, and pre-eminent above all, but to thee did Menoetius, son of Actor, thus give command: ‘ My child, in birth is Achilles nobler than thou, but thou art the elder though in might he is the better far.
2368. Yet do thou speak to him well a word of wisdom and give him counsel, and direct him; and he will obey thee to his profit.’
2369. Thus did the old man charge thee, but thou forgettest.
2370. Yet even now at the last do thou speak thus to wise - hearted Achilles, if so be he may hearken.
2371. Who knows but that heaven helping thou mightest rouse his spirit with thy persuading?
2372. A good thing is the persuasion of a friend.
2373. But if in his heart he is shunning some oracle and his queenly mother hath declared to him aught from Zeus, yet let him send thee forth, and with thee let the rest of the host of the Myrmidons follow, if so be thou mayest prove a light of deliverance to the Danaans; and let him give thee his fair armour to bear into the war, in hope that the Trojans may take thee for him, and so hold aloof from battle, and the warlike sons of the Achaeans may take breath, wearied though they be; for scant is the breathing - space in battle.
2374. And lightly might ye that are unwearied drive men that are wearied with battle back toward the city from the ships and the huts.
2375. So spake he, and roused the heart in the breast of Patroclus, and he set out to run along the line of the ships to Achilles, son of Aeacus.
2376. But when in his running Patroclus was come to the ships of godlike Odysseus, where was their place of gathering and of the giving of dooms, whereby also were builded their altars of the gods, there Eurypylus met him, the Zeus-born son of Euaemon, smitten in the thigh with an arrow, limping from out the battle.
2377. And in streams down from his head and shoulders flowed the sweat, and from his grievous wound the black blood was gushing, yet was his spirit unshaken.
2378. At sight of him the valiant son of Menoetius had pity on him, and with wailing spake to him winged words:
2379. Ah ye wretched men, leaders and lords of the Danaans, thus then were ye destined, far from your friends and your native land, to glut with your white fat the swift dogs in Troy.
2380. But come, tell me this, Eurypylus, warrior fostered of Zeus, will the Achaeans haply still hold back mighty Hector, or will they now perish, slain beneath his spear?
2381. And to him again made answer the wounded Eurypylus:
2382. No longer, Zeus-born Patroclus, will there be any defence of the Achaeans, but they will fling themselves upon the black ships.
2383. For verily all they that aforetime were bravest, lie among the ships smitten by darts or wounded with spear-thrusts at the hands of the Trojans, whose strength ever waxeth.
2384. But me do thou succour, and lead me to my black ship, and cut the arrow from my thigh, and wash the black blood from it with warm water, and sprinkle thereon kindly simples of healing power, whereof men say that thou hast learned from Achilles, whom Cheiron taught, the most righteous of the Centaurs.
2385. For the leeches, Podaleirius and Machaon, the one methinks lieth wounded amid the huts, having need himself of a goodly leech, and the other in the plain abideth the sharp battle of the Trojans.
2386. And to him again spake the valiant son of Menoetius:
2387. How may these things be?
2388. What shall we do, warrior Eurypylus?
2389. I am on my way to declare to wise - hearted Achilles a message wherewith Nestor of Gerenia, warder of the Achaeans, charged me.
2390. Nay, but even so will I not neglect thee that art in grievous plight.
2391. He spake and clasped the shepherd of the host beneath the breast, and led him to his hut, and his squire when he saw them strewed upon the ground hides of oxen.
2392. There Patroclus made him lie at length, and with a knife cut from his thigh the sharp - piercing arrow, and from the wound washed the black blood with warm water, and upon it cast a bitter root, when he had rubbed it between his hands, a root that slayeth pain, which stayed all his pangs; and the wound waxed dry, and the blood ceased.
2393. So then amid the huts the valiant son of Menoetius was tending the wounded Eurypylus, but the others, Argives and Trojans, fought on in throngs, nor were the ditch of the Danaans and their wide wall above long to protect them, the wall that they had builded as a defence for their ships and had drawn a trench about it — yet they gave not glorious hecatombs to the gods — that it might hold within its bounds their swift ships and abundant spoil, and keep all safe.
2394. Howbeit against the will of the immortal gods was it builded; wherefore for no long time did it abide unbroken.
2395. As long as Hector yet lived, and Achilles yet cherished his wrath, and the city of king Priam was unsacked, even so long the great wall of the Achaeans likewise abode unbroken.
2396. But when all the bravest of the Trojans had died and many of the Argives — some were slain and some were left — and the city of Priam was sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back in their ships to their dear native land, then verily did Poseidon and Apollo take counsel to sweep away the wall, bringing against it the might of all the rivers that flow forth from the mountains of Ida to the sea — Rhesus and Heptaporus and Caresus and Rhodius, and Granicus and Aesepus, and goodly Scamander, and Simois, by the banks whereof many shields of bull's - hide and many helms fell in the dust, and the race of men half - divine — of all these did Phoebus Apollo turn the mouths together, and for nine days' space he drave their flood against the wall; and Zeus rained ever continually, that the sooner he might whelm the wall in the salt sea.
2397. And the Shaker of Earth, bearing his trident in his hands, was himself the leader, and swept forth upon the waves all the foundations of beams and stones, that the Achaeans had laid with toil, and made all smooth along the strong stream of the Hellespont, and again covered the great beach with sand, when he had swept away the wall; and the rivers he turned back to flow in the channel, where aforetime they had been wont to pour their fair streams of water.
2398. Thus were Poseidon and Apollo to do in the aftertime; but then war and the din of war blazed about the well - builded wall, and the beams of the towers rang, as they were smitten; and the Argives, conquered by the scourge of Zeus, were penned by their hollow ships, and held in check in terror of Hector, the mighty deviser of rout, while he as aforetime fought like unto a whirlwind.
2399. And as when, among hounds and huntsmen, a wild boar or a lion wheeleth about, exulting in his strength, and these array them in ranks in fashion like a wall, and stand against him, and hurl from their hands javelins thick and fast; yet his valiant heart feareth not nor anywise quaileth, though his valour is his bane; and often he wheeleth him about and maketh trial of the ranks of men, and wheresoever he chargeth, there the ranks of men give way: even on this wise Hector went ever through the throng and besought his comrades, urging them to cross the trench.
2400. Howbeit his swift - footed horses dared not, but loudly they neighed, standing on the sheer brink, for the trench affrighted them, so wide was it, easy neither to o'erleap at a bound nor to drive across; for over - hanging banks stood all about its circuit on this side and on that, and at the top it was set with sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaeans had planted, close together and great, a defence against foemen.
2401. Not lightly might a horse, tugging at the wheeled car, get within that circuit; but the footmen were eager, if thy might achieve it.
2402. Then verily Polydamas drew nigh to Hector, and spake, saying: Hector, and ye other leaders of the Trojans and allies, it is but folly that we seek to drive across the trench our swift horses; hard in sooth is it to cross, for sharp stakes are set in it, and close anigh them is the wall of the Achaeans.
2403. There is it no wise possible for charioteers to descend and fight; for the space is narrow, and then methinks shall we suffer hurt.
2404. For if Zeus, that thundereth on high, is utterly to crush our foes in his wrath, and is minded to give aid unto the Trojans, there verily were I too fain that this might forthwith come to pass, that the Achaeans should perish here far from Argos, and have no name; but if they turn upon us and we be driven back from the ships and become entangled in the digged ditch, then methinks shall not one man of us return back to the city from before the Achaeans when they rally, even to bear the tidings.
2405. But come, even as I shall bid, let us all obey.
2406. As for the horses, let the squires hold them back by the trench, but let us on foot, arrayed in our armour, follow all in one throng after Hector; and the Achaeans will not withstand us, if so be the bonds of destruction are made fast upon them.
2407. So spake Polydamas, and his prudent counsel was well pleasing unto Hector, and forthwith he leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground.
2408. Nor did the other Trojans remain gathered together upon their chariots, but they all leapt forth when they beheld goodly Hector afoot.
2409. Then on his own charioteer each man laid command to hold in his horses well and orderly there at the trench, but the men divided and arrayed themselves, and marshalled in five companies they followed after the leaders.
2410. Some went with Hector and peerless Polydamas, even they that were most in number and bravest, and that were most fain to break through the wall and fight by the hollow ships, and with them followed Cebriones as the third; for by his chariot had Hector left another man, weaker than Cebriones.
2411. The second company was led by Paris and Alcathous and Agenor, and the third by Helenus and godlike Deïphobus — sons twain of Priam; and a third was with them, the warrior Asius, — Asius son of Hyrtacus, whom his horses tawny and great had borne from Arisbe, from the river Selleïs.
2412. And of the fourth company the valiant son of Anchises was leader, even Aeneas, and with him were Antenor's two sons, Archelochus and Acamas, well skilled in all manner of fighting.
2413. And Sarpedon led the glorious allies, and he chose as his comrades Glaucus and warlike Asteropaeus, for these seemed to him to be the bravest beyond all others after his own self, but he was pre-eminent even amid all.
2414. These then when they had fenced one another with their well - wrought shields of bull's -hide, made straight for the Danaans, full eagerly, nor deemed they that they would any more be stayed, but would fall upon the black ships.
2415. Then the rest of the Trojans and their far - famed allies obeyed the counsel of blameless Polydamas, but Asius, son of Hyrtacus, leader of men, was not minded to leave there his horses and his squire the charioteer, but chariot and all he drew nigh to the swift ships, fool that he was !
2416. for he was not to escape the evil fates, and return, glorying in horses and chariot, back from the ships to windy Ilios.
2417. Nay, ere that might be, fate, of evil name, enfolded him, by the spear of Idomeneus, the lordly son of Deucalion.
2418. For he made for the left wing of the ships, even where the Achaeans were wont to return from the plain with horses and chariots: there drave he through his horses and car, and at the gate he found not the doors shut nor the long bar drawn, but men were holding them flung wide open, if so be they might save any of their comrades fleeing from out the battle toward the ships.
2419. Thither of set purpose drave he his horses, and after him followed his men with shrill cries, for they deemed that they would no more be stayed of the Achaeans, but would fall upon the black ships — fools that they were !
2420. for at the gate they found two warriors most valiant, high - hearted sons of Lapith spearmen, the one stalwart Polypoetes, son of Peirithous, and the other Leonteus, peer of Ares the bane of men.
2421. These twain before the high gate stood firm even as oaks of lofty crest among the mountains, that ever abide the wind and rain day by day, firm fixed with roots great and long; even so these twain, trusting in the might of their arms, abode the oncoming of great Asius, and fled not.
2422. But their foes came straight against the well - built wall, lifting on high their shields of dry bull's- hide with loud shouting, round about king Asius, and Iamenus, and Orestes, and Adamas, son of Asius, and Thoön and Oenomaus.
2423. And the Lapiths for a time from within the wall had been rousing the well - greaved Achaeans to fight in defence of the ships; but when they saw the Trojans rushing upon the wall, while the Danaans with loud cries turned in flight, forth rushed the twain and fought in front of the gate like wild boars that amid the mountains abide the tumultuous throng of men and dogs that cometh against them, and charging from either side they crush the trees about them, cutting them at the root, and therefrom ariseth a clatter of tusks, till one smite them and take their life away: even so clattered the bright bronze about the breasts of the twain, as they were smitten with faces toward the foe; for. right hardily they fought, trusting in the host above them and in their own might.
2424. For the men above kept hurling stones from the well - built towers, in defence of their own lives and of the huts and of the swift - faring ships.
2425. And like snow - flakes the stones fell ever earthward, like flakes that a blustering wind, as it driveth the shadowy clouds, sheddeth thick and fast upon the bounteous earth; even so flowed the missiles from the hands of these, of Achaeans alike and Trojans; and helms rang harshly and bossed shields, as they were smitten with great stones.
2426. Then verily Asius, son of Hyrtacus, uttered a groan, and smote both his thighs, and in sore indignation he spake, saying: Father Zeus, of a surety thou too then art utterly a lover of lies, for I deemed not that the Achaean warriors would stay our might and our invincible hands.
2427. But they like wasps of nimble waist, or bees that have made their nest in a rugged path, and leave not their hollow home, but abide, and in defence of their young ward off hunter folk; even so these men, though they be but two, are not minded to give ground from the gate, till they either slay or be slain.
2428. So spake he, but with these words he moved not the mind of Zeus, for it was to Hector that Zeus willed to vouchsafe glory.
2429. But others were fighting in battle about the other gates, and hard were it for me, as though I were a god, to tell the tale of all these things, for everywhere about the wall of stone rose the wondrous - blazing fire; for the Argives, albeit in sore distress, defended their ships perforce; and the gods were grieved at heart, all that were helpers of the Danaans in battle.
2430. And the Lapiths clashed in war and strife.
2431. Then the son of Peirithous, mighty Polypoetes, cast with his spear and smote Damasus through the helmet with cheek pieces of bronze; and the bronze helm stayed not the spear, but the point of bronze brake clean through the bone, and all the brain was spattered about within; so stayed he him in his fury.
2432. And thereafter he slew Pylon and Ormenus.
2433. And Leonteus, scion of Ares, smote Hippomachus, son of Antimachus, with a cast of his spear, striking him upon the girdle.
2434. And again he drew from its sheath his sharp sword and darting upon him through the throng smote Antiphates first in close fight, so that he was hurled backward upon the ground; and thereafter Menon, and Iamenus, and Orestes, all of these one after the other he brought down to the bounteous earth.
2435. While they were stripping from these their shining arms, meanwhile the youths that followed with Polydamas and Hector, even they that were most in number and bravest, and that most were fain to break through the wall and burn the ships with fire, these still tarried in doubt, as they stood by the trench.
2436. For a bird had come upon them, as they were eager to cross over, an eagle of lofty flight, skirting the host on the left, and in its talons it bore a blood - red, monstrous snake, still alive as if struggling, nor was it yet forgetful of combat, it writhed backward, and smote him that held it on the breast beside the neck, till the eagle, stung with pain, cast it from him to the ground, and let it fall in the midst of the throng, and himself with a loud cry sped away down the blasts of the wind.
2437. And the Trojans shuddered when they saw the writhing snake lying in the midst of them, a portent of Zeus that beareth the aegis.
2438. Then verily Polydamas drew near, and spake to bold Hector: Hector, ever dost thou rebuke me in the gatherings of the folk, though I give good counsel, since it were indeed unseemly that a man of the people should speak contrariwise to thee, be it in council or in war, but he should ever increase thy might; yet now will I speak even as seemeth to me to be best.
2439. Let us not go forward to fight with the Danaans for the ships.
2440. For thus, methinks, will the issue be, seeing that in sooth this bird has come upon the Trojans, as they were eager to cross over, an eagle of lofty flight, skirting the host on the left, bearing in his talons a blood - red, monstrous snake, still living, yet straightway let it fall before he reached his own nest, neither finished he his course, to bring and give it to his little ones — even so shall we, though we break the gates and the wall of the Achaeans by our great might, and the Achaeans give way, come back over the selfsame road from th ships in disarray; for many of the Trojans shall we leave behind, whom th Achaeans shall slay with the bronze in defense of the ships.
2441. On this wise would a soothsayer interpret, one that in his mind had clear knowledge of omens, and to whom the folk gave ear.
2442. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake to him Hector of the flashing helm: Polydamas, this that thou sayest is no longer to my pleasure; yea, thou knowest how to devise better words than these.
2443. But if thou verily speakest thus in earnest, then of a surety have the gods themselves destroyed thy wits, seeing thou biddest me forget the counsels of loud - thundering Zeus, that himself promised me and bowed his head thereto.
2444. But thou biddest us be obedient to birds long of wing, that I regard not, nor take thought thereof, whether they fare to the right, toward the Dawn and the sun, or to the left toward the murky darkness.
2445. nay, for us, let us be obedient to the counsel of great Zeus, that is king over all mortals and immortals.
2446. One omen is best, to fight for one's country.
2447. Wherefore dost thou fear war and battle?
2448. For if the rest of us be slain one and all at the ships of the Argives, yet is there no fear that thou shouldest perish, — for thy heart is — not staunch in fight nor warlike.
2449. Howbeit, if thou shalt hold aloof from battle, or shalt beguile with thy words an other, and turn him from war, forthwith smitten by my spear shalt thou lose thy life.
2450. So spake he and led the way; and they followed after with a wondrous din; and thereat Zeus, that hurleth the thunderbolt, roused from the mountains of Ida a blast of wind, that bare the dust straight against the ships and he bewildered the mind of the Achaeans, but vouchsafed glory to the Trojans and to Hector.
2451. Trusting therefore in his portents and in their might they sought to break the great wall of the Achaeans.
2452. The pinnets of the fortifications they dragged down and overthrew the battlements, and pried out the supporting beams that the Achaeans had set first in the earth as buttresses for the wall.
2453. These they sought to drag out, and hoped to break the wall of the Achaeans.
2454. Howbeit not even now did the Danaans give ground from the path, but closed up the battlements with bull's-hides, and therefrom cast at the foemen, as they came up against the wall.
2455. And the two Aiantes ranged everywhere along the walls urging men on, and arousing the might of the Achaeans.
2456. One man with gentle words, another with harsh would they chide, whomsoever they saw giving ground utterly from the fight: Friends, whoso is pre-eminent among the Danaans, whoso holds a middle place, or whoso is lesser, for in nowise are all men equal in war, now is there a work for all, and this, I ween, ye know even of yourselves.
2457. Let no man turn him back to the ships now that he has heard one that cheers him on; nay, press ye forward, and urge ye one the other, in hope that Olympian Zeus, lord of the lightning, may grant us to thrust back the assault and drive our foes to the city.
2458. So shouted forth the twain, and aroused the battle of the Achaeans.
2459. And as flakes of snow fall thick on a winter's day, when Zeus, the counsellor, bestirreth him to snow, shewing forth to men these arrows of his, and he lulleth the winds and sheddeth the flakes continually, until he hath covered the peaks of the lofty mountains and the high headlands, and the grassy plains, and the rich tillage of men; aye, and over the harbours and shores of the grey sea is the snow strewn, albeit the wave as it beateth against it keepeth it off, but all things beside are wrapped therein, when the storm of Zeus driveth it on: even so from both sides their stones flew thick, some upon the Trojans, and some from the Trojans upon the Achaeans, as they cast at one another; and over all the wall the din arose.
2460. Yet not even then would the Trojans and glorious Hector have broken the gates of the wall and the long bar, had not Zeus the counsellor roused his own son, Sarpedon, against the Argives, as a lion against sleek kine.
2461. Forthwith he held before him his shield that was well balanced upon every side, a fair shield of hammered bronze, — that the bronze- smith had hammered out, and had stitched the many bull's -hides within with stitches of gold that ran all about its circuit.
2462. This he held before him, and brandished two spears, and so went his way like a mountain - nurtured lion that hath long lacked meat, and his proud spirit biddeth him go even into the close - built fold to make an attack upon the flocks.
2463. For even though he find thereby the herdsmen with dogs and spears keeping watch over the sheep, yet is he not minded to be driven from the steading ere he maketh essay; but either he leapeth amid the flock and seizeth one, or is himself smitten as a foremost champion by a javelin from a swift hand: even so did his spirit then urge godlike Sarpedon to rush upon the wall, and break- down the battlements.
2464. Straightway then he spake to Glaucus, son of Hippolochus: Glaucus, wherefore is it that we twain are held in honour above all with seats, and messes, and full cups in Lycia, and all men gaze upon us as on gods?
2465. Aye, and we possess a great demesne by the banks of Xanthus, a fair tract of orchard and of wheat - bearing plough - land.
2466. Therefore now it behoveth us to take our stand amid the foremost Lycians, and confront the blazing battle that many a one of the mail - clad Lycians may say: Verily no inglorious men be these that rule in Lycia, even our kings, they that eat fat sheep
2467. So spake he, and Glaucus turned not aside, neither disobeyed him, but the twain went straight forward, leading the great host of the Lycians.
2468. At sight of them, Menestheus, son of Peteos, shuddered, for it was to his part of the wall that they came, bearing with them ruin; and he looked in fear along the wall of the Achaeans, in hope that he might see one of the leaders who would ward off bane from his comrades; and he marked the Aiantes twain, insatiate in war, standing there, and Teucer that was newly come from his hut, close at hand; howbeit it was no wise possible for him to shout so as to be heard of them, so great a din was there, and the noise went up to heaven of smitten shields and helms with crests of horse - hair, and of the gates, for all had been closed, and before them stood the foe, and sought to break them by force, and enter in.
2469. Forthwith then to Aias he sent the herald Thoötes: Go, goodly Thoötes, run thou, and call Aias, or rather the twain, for that were far best of all, seeing that here will utter ruin soon be wrought.
2470. Hard upon us here press the leaders of the Lycians, who of old have ever been fierce in mighty conflicts.
2471. But if with them too yonder the toil of war and strife have arisen, yet at least let valiant Aias, son of Telamon, come alone, and let Teucer, that is well skilled with the bow, follow with him.
2472. So spake he, and the herald failed not to hearken as he heard, but set him to run beside the wall of the brazen - coated Achaeans, and he came and stood by the Aiantes, and straightway said:
2473. Ye Aiantes twain, leaders of the brazen - coated Achaeans, the son of Peteos, nurtured of Zeus, biddeth you go thither, that, though it be but for a little space, ye may confront the toil of war — both of you, if so may be, for that were far best
2474. Of all, seeing that yonder will utter ruin soon be wrought.
2475. Hard upon them there press the leaders of the Lycians, who of old have ever been fierce in mighty conflicts.
2476. But if here too war and strife have arisen, yet at least let valiant Aias, son of Telamon, go alone, and let Teucer, that is well skilled with the bow, follow with him.
2477. So spake he, and great Telamonian Aias failed not to hearken.
2478. Forthwith he spake winged words to the son of Oïleus: Aias, do ye twain, thou and strong Lycomedes, stand fast here and urge on the Danaans to fight amain, but I will go thither, and confront the war, and quickly will I come again, when to the full I have borne them aid.
2479. So saying Telamonian Aias departed, and with him went Teucer, his own brother, begotten of one father, and with them Pandion bare the curved bow of Teucer.
2480. Now when, as they passed along within the wall, they reached the post of great-souled Menestheus — and to men hard pressed they came — the foe were mounting upon the battlements like a dark whirlwind, even the mighty leaders and rulers of the Lycians; and they clashed together in fight, and the battle - cry arose.
2481. Then Aias, son of Telamon, was first to slay his man, even great - souled Epicles, comrade of Sarpedon, for he smote him with a huge jagged rock, that lay the topmost of all within the wall by the battlements.
2482. Not easily with both hands could a man, such as mortals now are, hold it, were he never so young and strong, but Aias lifted it on high and hurled it, and he shattered the four-horned helmet, and crushed together all the bones of the head of Epicles; and he fell like a diver from the high wall, and his spirit left his bones.
2483. And Teucer smote Glaucus, the stalwart son of Hippolochus, as he rushed upon them, with an arrow from the high wall, where he saw his arm uncovered; and he stayed him from fighting.
2484. Back from the wall he leapt secretly, that no man of the Achaeans might mark that he had been smitten, and vaunt over him boastfully.
2485. But over Sarpedon came grief at Glaucus' departing, so soon as he was ware thereof, yet even so forgat he not to fight, but smote with a thrust of his spear Alcmaon, son of Thestor, with sure aim, and again drew forth the spear.
2486. And Alcmaon, following the spear, fell headlong, and about him rang his armour, dight with bronze.
2487. But Sarpedon with strong hands caught hold of the battlement and tugged, and the whole length of it gave way, and the wall above was laid bare, and he made a path for many.
2488. But against him came Aias and Teucer at the one moment:
2489. Teucer smote him with an arrow on the gleaming baldric of his sheltering shield about his breast, but Zeus warded off the fates from his own son that he should not be laid low at the ships' sterns; and Aias leapt upon him and thrust against his shield, but the spear-point passed not through, howbeit he made him reel in his onset.
2490. So he gave ground a little space from the battlement, yet withdrew not wholly, for his spirit hoped to win him glory.
2491. And he wheeled about, and called to the godlike Lycians:
2492. Ye Lycians, wherefore are ye thus slack in furious valour?
2493. Hard is it for me, how mighty so ever I be, alone to breach the wall, and make a path to the ships.
2494. Nay, have at them with me; the more men the better work.
2495. So spake he; and they, seized with fear of the rebuke of their king, pressed on the more around about their counsellor and king, and the Argives over against them made strong their battalions within the wall; and before them was set a mighty work.
2496. For neither could the mighty Lycians break the wall of the Danaans, and make a path to the ships, nor ever could the Danaan spearmen thrust back the Lycians from the wal I, when once they had drawn nigh thereto.
2497. But as two men with measuring - rods in hand strive about the landmark - stones in a common field, and in a narrow space contend each for his equal share; even so did the battlements hold these apart, and over them they smote the bull's- hide bucklers about one another's breasts, the round shields and fluttering targets.
2498. And many were wounded in the flesh by thrusts of the pitiless bronze, both whensoever any turned and his back was left bare, as they fought, and many clean through the very shield.
2499. Yea, everywhere the walls and battlements were spattered with blood of men from both sides, from Trojans and Achaeams alike.
2500. Howbeit even so they could not put the Achaeans to rout, but they held their ground, as a careful woman that laboureth with her hands at spinning, holdeth the balance and raiseth the weight and the wool in either scale, making them equal, that she may win a meagre wage for her children; so evenly was strained their war and battle, until Zeus vouchsafed the glory of victory to Hector, son of Priam, that was first to leap within the wall of the Achaeans he uttered a piercing shout, calling aloud to the Trojans: Rouse you horse - taming Trojans, break the wall of the Argives, and fling among the ships wondrous - blazing fire.
2501. So spake he, urging them on, and they all heard with their ears, and rushed straight upon the wall in one mass, and with sharp spears in their hands mounted upon the pinnets.
2502. And Hector grasped and bore a stone that lay before the gate, thick at the base, but sharp at the point; not easily might two men, the mightiest of the folk, have upheaved it from the ground upon a wain — men, such as mortals now are — yet lightly did he wield it even alone; and the son of crooked - counselling Cronos made it light for him.
2503. And as when a shepherd easily beareth the fleece of a ram, taking it in one hand, and but little doth the weight thereof burden him; even so Hector lifted up the stone and bare it straight against the doors that guarded the close and strongly fitted gates — double gates they were, and high, and two cross bars held them within, and a single bolt fastened them.
2504. He came and stood hard by, and planting himself smote them full in the midst, setting his feet well apart that his cast might lack no strength; and he brake off both the hinges, and the stone fell within by its own weight, and loudly groaned the gates on either side, nor did the bars hold fast, but the doors were dashed apart this way and that beneath the onrush of the stone.
2505. And glorious Hector leapt within, his face like sudden night; and he shone in terrible bronze wherewith his body was clothed about, and in his hands he held two spears.
2506. None that met him could have held him back, none save the gods, when once he leapt within the gates; and his two eyes blazed with fire.
2507. And he wheeled him about in the throng, and called to the Trojans to climb over the wall; and they hearkened to his urging.
2508. Forthwith some clomb over the wall, and others poured in by the strong - built gate, and the Danaans were driven in rout among the hollow ships, and a ceaseless din arose.
2509. Now Zeus, when he had brought the Trojans and Hector to the ships, left the combatants there to have toil and woe unceasingly, but himself turned away his bright eyes, and looked afar, upon the land of the Thracian horsemen, and of the Mysians that fight in close combat, and of the lordly Hippemolgi that drink the milk of mares, and of the Abii, the most righteous of men.
2510. To Troy he no longer in any wise turned his bright eyes, for he deemed not in his heart that any of the immortals would draw nigh to aid either Trojans or Danaans.
2511. But the lord, the Shaker of Earth, kept no blind watch, for he sat marvelling at the war and the battle, high on the topmost peak of wooded Samothrace, for from thence all Ida was plain to see; and plain to see were the city of Priam, and the ships of the Achaeans.
2512. There he sat, being come forth from the sea, and he had pity on the Achaeans that they were overcome by the Trojans, and against Zeus was he mightily wroth.
2513. Forthwith then he went down from the rugged mount, striding forth with swift footsteps, and the high mountains trembled and the woodland beneath the immortal feet of Poseidon as he went.
2514. Thrice he strode in his course, and with the fourth stride he reached his goal, even Aegae, where was his famous palace builded in the depths of the mere, golden and gleaming, imperishable for ever.
2515. Thither came he, and let harness beneath his car his two bronze hooved horses, swift of flight, with flowing manes of gold; and with gold he clad himself about his body, and grasped the well - wrought whip of gold, and stepped upon his car, and set out to drive over the waves.
2516. Then gambolled the sea-beasts beneath him on every side from out the deeps, for well they knew their lord, and in gladness the sea parted before him; right swiftly sped they on, and the axle of bronze was not wetted beneath; and unto the ships of the Achaeans did the prancing steeds bear their lord.
2517. There is a wide cavern in the depths of the deep mere, midway between Tenedos and rugged Imbros.
2518. There Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, stayed his horses, and loosed them from the car, and cast before them food ambrosial to graze upon, and about their feet he put hobbles of gold, neither to be broken nor loosed, that they might abide fast where they were against the return of their lord; and himself he went to the host of the Achaeans.
2519. But the Trojans, all in one body, like flame or tempest - blast were following furiously after Hector, son of Priam, with loud shouts and cries, and they deemed that they would take the ships of the Achaeans, and slay thereby all the bravest.
2520. Howbeit Poseidon, the Enfolder and Shaker of Earth, set him to urge on the Argives, when he had come forth from the deep sea, in the likeness of Calchas, both in form and untiring voice.
2521. To the two Aiantes spake he first, that were of themselves full eager:
2522. Ye Aiantes twain, ye two shall save the host of the Achaeans, if ye are mindful of your might, and think not of chill rout.
2523. Not otherwhere do I dread the invincible hands of the Trojans that have climbed over the great wall in their multitude, for the well - greaved Achaeans will hold back all; nay it is here that I have wondrous dread lest some evil befall us, here where yon madman is leading on like a flame of fire, even Hector, that boasts him to be a son of mighty Zeus.
2524. But in the hearts of you twain may some god put it, here to stand firm yourselves, and to bid others do the like; so might ye drive him back from the swift - faring ships, despite his eagerness, aye, even though the Olympian himself be urging him on.
2525. Therewith the Enfolder and Shaker of Earth smote the twain with his staff, and filled them with valorous strength and made their limbs light, their feet and their hands above.
2526. And himself, even as a hawk, swift of flight, speedeth forth to fly, and poising himself aloft above a high sheer rock, darteth over the plain to chase some other bird; even so from them sped Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth.
2527. And of the twain swift Aias, son of Oïleus, was first to mark the god, and forthwith spake to Aias, son of Telamon: Aias, seeing it is one of the gods who hold Olympus that in the likeness of the seer biddeth the two of us fight beside the ships — not Calchas is he, the prophet, and reader of omens, for easily did I know the tokens behind him of feet and of legs as he went from us; and plain to be known are the gods — lo, mine own heart also within my breast is the more eager to war and do battle, and my feet beneath and my hands above are full fain.
2528. Then in answer spake to him Telamonian Aias:
2529. Even so too mine own hands invincible are fain now to grasp the spear, and my might is roused, and both my feet are swift beneath me; and I am eager to meet even in single fight Hector, Priam's son, that rageth incessantly.
2530. On this wise spake they one to the other, rejoicing in the fury of fight which the god put in their hearts; and meanwhile the Enfolder of Earth roused the Achaeans that were in the rear beside the swift ships, and were refreshing their hearts.
2531. Their limbs were loosed by their grievous toil and therewithal sorrow waxed in their hearts, as they beheld the Trojans that had climbed over the great wall in their multitude.
2532. Aye, as they looked upon these they let tears fall from beneath their brows, for they deemed not that they should escape from ruin.
2533. But the Shaker of Earth, lightly passing among them, aroused their strong battalions.
2534. To Teucer first he came and to Leïtus, to bid them on, and to the warrior Peneleos, and Thoas and Deïpyrus, and Meriones and Antilochus, masters of the war-cry; to these he spake, spurring them on with winged words: Shame, ye Argives, mere striplings !
2535. It was in your fighting that I trusted for the saving of our ships; but if ye are to flinch from grievous war, then of a surety hath the day now dawned for us to be vanquished beneath the Trojans.
2536. Out upon it !
2537. Verily a great marvel is this that mine eyes behold, a dread thing that I deemed should never be brought to pass: the Trojans are making way against our ships, they that heretofore were like panic-stricken hinds that in the woodland become the prey of jackals and pards and wolves, as they wander vainly in their cowardice, nor is there any fight in them.
2538. Even so the Trojans aforetime had never the heart to abide and face the might and the hands of the Achaeans, no not for a moment.
2539. But lo, now far from the city they are fighting at the hollow ships because of the baseness of our leader and the slackness of the folk, that, being at strife with him, have no heart to defend the swift - faring ships, but are slain in the midst of them.
2540. But if in very truth the warrior son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon, is the cause of all, for that he wrought dishonour on the swift - footed son of Peleus, yet may we in no wise prove slack in war.
2541. Nay, let us atone for the fault with speed: the hearts of good men admit of atonement.
2542. But it is no longer well that ye are slack in furious valour, all ye that are the best men in the host.
2543. Myself I would not quarrel with one that was slack in war, so he were but a sorry wight, but with you I am exceeding wroth at heart.
2544. Ye weaklings, soon ye shall cause yet greater evil by this slackness.
2545. Nay, take in your hearts, each man of you, shame and indignation; for in good sooth mighty is the conflict that has arisen.
2546. Hector, good at the war-cry, is fighting at the ships, strong in his might, and hath broken the gates and the long bar.
2547. Thus did the Earth-enfolder arouse the Achaeans with his word of command, and round about the twain Aiantes their battalions took their stand, so strong in might, that not Ares might have entered in and made light of them, nor yet Athene, the rouser of hosts; for they that were the chosen bravest abode the onset of the Trojans and goodly Hector, fencing spear with spear, and shield with serried shield; buckler pressed on buckler, helm on helm, and man on man; and the horse - hair crests on the bright helmet - ridges touched each other, as the men moved their heads, in such close array stood they one by another, and spears in stout hands overlapped each other, as they were brandished, and their minds swerved not, but they were fain to fight.
2548. Then the Trojans drave forward in close throng and Hector led them, pressing ever forward, like a boulder from a cliff that a river swollen by winter rains thrusteth from the brow of a hill, when it has burst with its wondrous flood the foundations of the ruthless stone; high aloft it leapeth, as it flies, and the woods resound beneath it, and it speedeth on its course and is not stayed until it reacheth the level plain, but then it rolleth no more for all its eagerness; even so Hector for a time threatened lightly to make his way even to the sea through the huts and ships of the Achaeans, slaying as he went, but when he encountered the close - set battalions, then was he stayed, as he drew close against them.
2549. And the sons of the Achaeans faced him, thrusting with swords and two -edged spears, and drave him back from them, so that he gave ground and was made to reel.
2550. Then he uttered a piercing shout, calling aloud to the Trojans: Ye Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians that fight in close combat, stand ye fast.
2551. No long space shall the Achaeans hold me back, for all they have arrayed themselves in fashion like a wall; nay, methinks, they will give ground before my spear, if verily the highest of gods hath urged me on, the loud - thundering lord of Hera.
2552. So saying, he aroused the strength and spirit of every man.
2553. Then among them with high heart strode Deïphobus, son of Priam, and before him he held his shield that was well - balanced upon every side, stepping forward lightly on his feet and advancing under cover of his shield.
2554. And Meriones aimed at him with his bright spear, and cast, and missed not, but smote the shield of bull's hide, that was well balanced upon every side, yet drave not in any wise therethrough; nay, well ere that might be, the long spear- shaft was broken in the socket; and Deïphobus held from him the shield of bull's hide, and his heart was seized with fear of the spear of wise - hearted Meriones; but that warrior shrank back into the throng of his comrades, and waxed wondrous wroth both for the loss of victory and for the spear which he had shattered.
2555. And he set out to go along the huts and ships of the Achaeans to fetch him a long spear that he had left in his hut.
2556. But the rest fought on, and a cry unquenchable arose.
2557. And Teucer, son of Telamon, was first to slay his man, even the spearman Imbrius, the son of Mentor, rich in horses.
2558. He dwelt in Pedaeum before the sons of the Achaeans came, and had to wife a daughter of Priam that was born out of wedlock, even Medesicaste; but when the curved ships of the Danaans came he returned back to Ilios and was pre-eminent among the Trojans, and he dwelt in the house of Priam, who held him in like honour with his own children.
2559. Him did the son of Telamon smite beneath the ear with a thrust of his long spear, and again drew forth the spear; and he fell like an ash - tree that, on the summit of a mountain that is seen from afar on every side, is cut down by the bronze, and bringeth its tender leafage to the ground; even so fell he, and about him rang his armour dight with bronze.
2560. And Teucer rushed forth eager to strip from him his armour, but Hector, even as he rushed, cast at him with his bright spear.
2561. Howbeit Teucer, looking steadily at him, avoided the spear of bronze by a little, but Hector smote Amphimachus, son of Cteatus, the son of Actor, in the breast with his spear as he was coming into the battle; and he fell with a thud, and upon him his armour clanged.
2562. Then Hector rushed forth to tear from the head of great-hearted Amphimachus the helm that was fitted to his temples, but Aias lunged with his bright spear at Hector as he rushed, yet in no wise reached he his flesh, for he was all clad in dread bronze; but he smote the boss of his shield, and thrust him back with mighty strength, so that he gave ground backward from the two corpses, and the Achaeans drew them off.
2563. Amphimachus then did Stichius and goodly Menestheus, leaders of the Athenians, carry to the host of the Achaeans, and Imbrius the twain Aiantes bare away, their hearts fierce with furious valour.
2564. And as when two lions that have snatched away a goat from sharp - toothed hounds, bear it through the thick brush, holding it in their jaws high above the ground, even so the twain warrior Aiantes held Imbrius on high, and stripped him of his armour.
2565. And the head did the son of Oïleus cut from the tender neck, being wroth for the slaying of Amphimachus, and with a swing he sent it rolling through the throng like a ball; and it fell in the dust before the feet of Hector.
2566. Then verily Poseidon waxed mightily wroth at heart when his son's son fell in the dread conflict, and he went his way along the huts and ships of the Achaeans to arouse the Danaans; but for the Trojans was he fashioning woes.
2567. And there met him Idomeneus, famed for his spear, on his way from a comrade that he had but now found coming from the battle smitten in the knee with the sharp bronze.
2568. Him his comrades bare forth, but Idomeneus had given charge to the leeches, and was going to his hut, for he was still fain to confront the battle; and the lord, the Shaker of Earth, spake to him, likening his voice to that of Andraemon's son Thoas, that in all Pleuron and steep Calydon was lord over the Aetolians, and was honoured of the folk even as a god: Idomeneus, thou counsellor of the Cretans, where now I pray thee, are the threats gone, wherewith the sons of the Achaeans threatened the Trojans?
2569. And to him Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, made answer: O Thoas, there is no man now at fault, so far as I wot thereof; for we are all skilled in war.
2570. Neither is any man holden of craven error, nor doth any through dread withdraw him from evil war, but even thus, I ween, must it be the good pleasure of the son of Cronos, supreme in might, that the Achaeans should perish here far from Argos, and have no name.
2571. But, Thoas, seeing that aforetime thou wast ever staunch in fight, and dost also urge on another, wheresoever thou seest one shrinking from fight, therefore now cease thou not, but call to every man.
2572. And Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, answered him: Idomeneus, never may that man any more return home from Troy-land, but here may he become the sport of dogs, whoso in this day's course of his own will shrinketh from fight.
2573. Up then, take thine harness and get thee forth: herein beseems it that we play the man together, in hope there may be help in us, though we be but two.
2574. Prowess comes from fellowship even of right sorry folk, but we twain know well how to do battle even with men of valour.
2575. So spake he, and went back again, a god into the toil of men; and Idomeneus, as soon as he was come to his well - built hut, did on his fair armour about his body, and grasped two spears, and went his way like the lightning that the son of Cronos seizeth in his hand and brandisheth from gleaming Olympus, showing forth a sign to mortals, and brightly flash the rays thereof; even so shone the bronze about his breast as he ran.
2576. And Meriones, his valiant squire, met him, while yet he was near the hut; for he was on his way to fetch him a spear of bronze; and mighty Idomeneus spake to him: Meriones, Molus' son, swift of foot, thou dearest of my comrades, wherefore art thou come, leaving the war and battle?
2577. Art thou haply wounded, and doth the point of a dart distress thee?
2578. Or art thou come after me on some message?
2579. Nay, of mine own self am I fain, not to abide in the huts, but to fight.
2580. To him again the wise Meriones made answer: Idomeneus, counsellor of the brazen - coated Cretans, I am on my way to fetch a spear, if perchance thou hast one left in the huts; for the one that I bare of old have I shattered, as I cast at the shield of the overweening Deïphobus.
2581. And to him Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, made answer: Spears, if thou wilt, thou shalt find, be it one or twenty, standing in the hut against the bright entrance wall, spears of the Trojans whereof it is my wont to despoil their slain.
2582. For I am not minded to fight with the foemen while standing afar off; wherefore I have spears and bossed shields, and helms, and corselets gleaming bright.
2583. Then to him the wise Meriones made answer:
2584. Aye, in mine own hut also and my black ship are many spoils of the Trojans, but I have them not at hand to take thereof.
2585. For I deem that I too am not forgetful of valour, but I take my stand amid the foremost in battle, where men win glory, whenso the strife of war ariseth.
2586. Some other of the brazen - coated Achaeans might sooner be unaware of my fighting, but thou methinks of thine own self knowest it well.
2587. And to him Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, made answer: I know what manner of man thou art in valour; what need hast thou to tell the tale thereof?
2588. For if now all the best of us were being told off besides the ships for an ambush, wherein the valour of men is best discerned — there the coward cometh to light and the man of valour; for the colour of the coward changeth ever to another hue, nor is the spirit in his breast stayed that he should abide steadfast, but he shifteth from knee to knee and resteth on either foot, and his heart beats loudly in his breast as he bodeth death, and the teeth chatter in his mouth; but the colour of the brave man changeth not, neither feareth he overmuch when once he taketh his place in the ambush of warriors, but he prayeth to mingle forthwith in woeful war — not even in such case, I say, would any man make light of thy courage or the strength of thy hands.
2589. For if so be thou wert stricken by a dart in the toil of battle, or smitten with a thrust, not from behind in neck or back would the missile fall; nay, but on thy breast would it light or on thy belly, as thou wert pressing on into the dalliance of the foremost fighters.
2590. But come, no longer let us loiter here and talk thus like children, lest haply some man wax wroth beyond measure; nay, but go thou to the hut, and get thee a mighty spear.
2591. So spake he, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, speedily took from the hut a spear of bronze, and followed Idomeneus with high thought of battle.
2592. And even as Ares, the bane of mortals, goeth forth to war, and with him followeth Rout, his son, valiant alike and fearless, that turneth to flight a warrior, were he never so staunch of heart — these twain arm themselves and go forth from Thrace to join the Ephyri or the great-hearted Phlegyes, yet they hearken not to both sides, but give glory to one or the other; even in such wise did Meriones and Idomeneus, leaders of men, go forth into the fight, harnessed in flaming bronze.
2593. And Meriones spake first to Idomeneus, saying: Son of Deucalion, at what point art thou eager to enter the throng?
2594. On the right of all the host, or in the centre, or shall it be on the left?
2595. For verily, methinks, in no other place do the long - haired Achaeans so fail in the fight.
2596. And to him again Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, made answer:
2597. Among the midmost ships there be others for defence, the two Aiantes, and Teucer, best of all the Achaeans in bowmanship, and a good man too in close fight; these shall drive Hector, Priam's son, to surfeit of war, despite his eagerness, be he never so stalwart.
2598. Hard shall it be for him, how furious soever for war, to overcome their might and their invincible hands, and to fire the ships, unless the son of Cronos should himself cast a blazing brand upon the swift ships.
2599. But to no man would great Telamonian Aias yield, to any man that is mortal, and eateth the grain of Demeter, and may be cloven with the bronze or crushed with great stones.
2600. Nay, not even to Achilles, breaker of the ranks of men, would he give way, in close fight at least; but in fleetness of foot may no man vie with Achilles.
2601. But for us twain, do thou, even as thou sayest, make for the left of the host, that we may know forthwith whether we shall give glory to another or another to us.
2602. So spake he, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, led the way until they came to the host, at the point whither Idomeneus bade him go.
2603. Now when the Trojans had sight of Idomeneus, in might as it were a flame, himself and his squire clad in armour richly dight, they called one to another through the throng, and all made at him; and by the sterns of the ships arose a strife of men clashing together.
2604. And as gusts come thick and fast when shrill winds are blowing, on a day when dust lies thickest on the roads, and the winds raise up confusedly a great cloud of dust; even so their battle clashed together, and they were eager in the throng to slay one another with the sharp bronze.
2605. And the battle, that brings death to mortals, bristled with long spears which they held for the rending of flesh, and eyes were blinded by the blaze of bronze from gleaming helmets, and corselets newly burnished, and shining shields, as men came on confusedly.
2606. Sturdy in sooth would he have been of heart that took joy at sight of such toil of war, and grieved not.
2607. Thus were the two mighty sons of Cronos, divided in purpose, fashioning grievous woes for mortal warriors.
2608. Zeus would have victory for the Trojans and Hector, so giving glory to Achilles, swift of foot; yet was he in no wise minded that the Achaean host should perish utterly before the face of Ilios, but was fain only to give glory to Thetis and to her son, strong of heart.
2609. But Poseidon went among the Argives and urged them on, stealing forth secretly from the grey sea; for it vexed him that they were being overcome by the Trojans, and against Zeus was he exceeding wroth.
2610. Both the twain verily were of one stock and of one parentage, but Zeus was the elder born and the wiser.
2611. Therefore it was that Poseidon avoided to give open aid, but secretly sought ever to rouse the Argives throughout the host, in the likeness of a man.
2612. So these twain knotted the ends of the cords of mighty strife and evil war, and drew them taut over both armies, a knot none might break nor undo, that loosed the knees of many men.
2613. Then Idomeneus, albeit his hair was flecked with grey, called to the Danaans, and leaping amid the Trojans turned them to flight.
2614. For he slew Othryoneus of Cabesus, a sojourner in Troy, that was but newly come following the rumour of war; and he asked in marriage the comeliest of the daughters of Priam, even Cassandra; he brought no gifts of wooing, but promised a mighty deed, that he would drive forth perforce out of Troy -land the sons of Achaeans.
2615. To him the old man Priam promised that he would give her, and bowed his head thereto, and Othryoneus fought, trusting in his promise.
2616. But Idomeneus aimed at him with his bright spear, and cast and smote him as he strode proudly on, nor did the corselet of bronze that he wore avail him, but the spear was fixed full in his belly, and he fell with a thud and Idomeneus exulted over him and spake, saying:
2617. Othryoneus, verily above all mortal men do I count thee happy, if in good sooth thou shalt accomplish all that thou didst promise to Dardanian Priam; and he promised thee his own daughter.
2618. Aye, and we too would promise the like and would bring all to pass, and would give thee the comeliest of the daughters of the son of Atreus, bringing her forth from Argos that thou mightest wed her; if only thou wilt make cause with us and sack the well - peopled city of Ilios.
2619. Nay, follow with us, that at the seafaring ships we may make agreement about the marriage, for thou mayest be sure we deal not hardly in exacting gifts of wooing.
2620. So saying, the warrior Idomeneus dragged him by the foot through the mighty conflict.
2621. But Asius came to bear aid to Othryoneus, on foot in front of his horses; and these twain the squire that was his charioteer ever drave so that their breath smote upon the shoulders of Asius.
2622. And he was ever fain of heart to cast at Idomeneus; but the other was too quick for him, and smote him with a cast of his spear on the throat beneath the chin, and drave the bronze clean through.
2623. And he fell as an oak falls, or a poplar, or a tall pine that among the mountains shipwrights fell with whetted axes to be a ship's timber; even so before his horses and chariot Asius lay out - stretched, moaning aloud and clutching at the bloody dust.
2624. And the charioteer, stricken with terror, kept not the wits that afore he had, neither dared turn the horses back and so escape from out the hands of the foemen; but Antilochus, staunch in fight, aimed at him, and pierced him through the middle with his spear, nor did the corselet of bronze that he wore avail him, but he fixed the spear full in his belly.
2625. And gasping he fell from out his well - built car, and the horses Antilochus, son of great - souled Nestor, drave forth from the Trojans into the host of the well - greaved Achaeans.
2626. Then Deïphobus in sore grief for Asius drew very nigh to Idomeneus, and cast at him with his bright spear.
2627. Howbeit Idomeneus, looking steadily at him, avoided the spear of bronze, for he hid beneath the cover of his shield that was well - balanced upon every side, the which he was wont to bear, cunningly wrought with bull's hide and gleaming bronze, and fitted with two rods; beneath this he gathered himself together, and the spear of bronze flew over; and harshly rang his shield, as the spear grazed thereon.
2628. Yet nowise in vain did Deïphobus let the spear fly from his heavy hand, but he smote Hypsenor, son of Hippasus, shepherd of the people, in the liver beneath the midriff, and straightway loosed his knees.
2629. And Deïphobus exulted over him in terrible wise, and cried aloud: Hah, in good sooth not unavenged lies Asius; nay, methinks, even as he fareth to the house of Hades, the strong warder, will he be glad at heart, for lo, I have given him one to escort him on his way !
2630. So spake he, and upon the Argives came sorrow by reason of his exulting, and beyond all did he stir the soul of wise - hearted Antilochus; howbeit, despite his sorrow, he was not unmindful of his dear comrade, but ran and bestrode him, and covered him with his shield.
2631. Then two trusty comrades stooped down, even Mecisteus, son of Echius, and goodly Alastor, and bare Hypsenor, groaning heavily, to the hollow ships.
2632. And Idomeneus slackened not in his furious might, but was ever fain to enwrap some one of the Trojans in the darkness of night, or himself to fall in warding off ruin from the Achaeans.
2633. Then the dear son of Aesyetes, fostered of Zeus, the warrior Alcathous — son by marriage was he to Anchises, and had married the eldest of his daughters, Hippodameia, whom her father and queenly mother heartily loved in their hall, for that she excelled all maidens of her years in comeliness, and in handiwork, and in wisdom; wherefore the best man in wide Troy had taken her to wife — this Alcathous did Poseidon subdue beneath Idomeneus, for he cast a spell upon his bright eyes and ensnared his glorious limbs that he might nowise flee backwards nor avoid the spear; but as he stood fixed, even as a pillar or a tree, high and leafy, the warrior Idomeneus smote him with a thrust of his spear full upon the breast, and clave his coat of bronze round about him, that aforetime ever warded death from his body, but now it rang harshly as it was cloven about the spear.
2634. And he fell with a thud, and the spear was fixed in his heart, that still beating made the butt thereof to quiver; howbeit, there at length did mighty Ares stay its fury.
2635. But Idomeneus exulted over him in terrible wise, and cried aloud: Deïphobus, shall we now deem perchance that due requital hath been made — three men slain for one — seeing thou boasteth thus?
2636. Nay, good sir, but stand forth thyself and face me, that thou mayest know what manner of son of Zeus am I that am come hither.
2637. For Zeus at the first begat Minos to be a watcher over Crete, and Minos again got him a son, even the peerless Deucalion, and Deucalion begat me, a lord over many men in wide Crete; and now have the ships brought me hither a bane to thee and thy father and the other Trojans.
2638. So spake he, and Deïphobus was divided in counsel, whether he should give ground and take to him as comrade some one of the great- souled Trojans, or should make trial by himself alone.
2639. And as he pondered this thing seemed to him the better — to go after Aeneas; and he found him standing last amid the throng, for ever was Aeneas wroth against goodly Priam, for that brave though he was amid warriors Priam honoured him not a whit.
2640. Then Deïphobus drew near and spake to him winged words: Aeneas, counsellor of the Trojans, now in sooth it behoveth thee to bear aid to thy sister's husband, if in any wise grief for thy kin cometh upon thee.
2641. Nay, come thou with me, that we may bear aid to Alcathous, who, for all he was but thy sister's husband, reared thee in the halls when thou wast yet a little child; he, I tell thee, hath been slain of Idomeneus, famed for his spear.
2642. So spake he, and roused the heart in the breast of Aeneas, and he went to seek Idomeneus, with high thoughts of war.
2643. Howbeit terror gat not hold of Idomeneus, as he had been some petted boy, but he abode like a boar in the mountains, that trusteth in his strength, and abideth the great, tumultuous throng of men that cometh against him, in a lonely place; he bristleth up his back and his two eyes blaze with fire, and he whetteth his tusks, eager to ward off dogs and men; even so Idomeneus, famed for his spear, abode the oncoming of Aeneas to bear aid, and gave not ground, but called to his comrades, looking unto Ascalaphus, Aphareus, and Deïpyrus, and Meriones, and Antilochus, masters of the war-cry; to these he spake winged words, and spurred them on: Hither, friends, and bear aid to me that am alone, and sorely do I dread the oncoming of Aeneas, swift of foot, that cometh against me; right strong is he to slay men in battle, and he hath the flower of youth, wherein is the fulness of strength.
2644. Were we but of like age and our mood such as now it is, then forthwith should he win great victory, or haply I.
2645. So spake he, and they all, having one spirit in their breasts, took their stand, each hard by the other, leaning their shields against their shoulders.
2646. And Aeneas over against them called to his comrades, looking unto Deïphobus, and Paris, and goodly Agenor, that with himself were leaders of the Trojans; and after them followed the host, as sheep follow after the ram to water from the place of feeding, and the shepherd joyeth in his heart; even so the heart of Aeneas was glad in his breast, when he saw the throng of the host that followed after him.
2647. Then over Alcathous they clashed in close fight with their long spears, and about their breasts the bronze rang terribly as they aimed each at the other in the throng; and above all the rest two men of valour, Aeneas and Idomeneus, peers of Ares, were eager each to cleave the other's flesh with the pitiless bronze.
2648. And Aeneas first cast at Idomeneus, but he, looking steadily at him, avoided the spear of bronze, and the lance of Aeneas sank quivering down in to the earth, for that it sped in vain from his mighty hand.
2649. But Idomeneus cast and smote Oenomaus, full upon the belly, and brake the plate of his corselet, and the bronze let forth the bowels therethrough; and he fell in the dust and clutched the earth in his palm.
2650. And Idomeneus drew forth from out the corpse the far-shadowing spear, yet could he not prevail likewise to strip the rest of the fair armour from his shoulders, since he was sore pressed with missiles.
2651. For the joints of his feet were not firm as of old in a charge, that he might rush forth after his own cast, or avoid another's.
2652. Wherefore in close fight he warded off the pitiless day of doom, but in flight his feet no longer bare him swiftly from the war.
2653. And as he drew back step by step Deïphobus cast at him with his shining spear, for verily he ever cherished a ceaseless hate against him.
2654. Howbeit this time again he missed him, and smote with his spear Ascalaphus, son of Enyalius, and through the shoulder the mighty spear held its way; and he fell in the dust and clutched the ground with his palm.
2655. But as yet loud - voiced dread Ares wist not at all that his son had fallen in the mighty conflict; but he sat on the topmost peak of Olympus beneath the golden clouds, constrained by the will of Zeus, where also were the other immortal gods, being held aloof from the war.
2656. Then over Ascalaphus they clashed in close fight, and Deïphobus tore from Ascalaphus his shining helm, but Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, leapt upon Deïphobus and smote his arm with his spear, and from his hand the crested helm fell to the ground with a clang.
2657. And Meriones sprang forth again like a vulture, and drew forth the mighty spear from the upper arm of Deïphobus, and shrank back in the throng of his comrades.
2658. But Polites, the own brother of Deïphobus, stretched his arms around his waist, and led him forth from out the dolorous war, until he came to the swift horses that stood waiting for him at the rear of the battle and the conflict with their charioteer and chariot richly dight.
2659. These bare him to the city groaning heavily and sore distressed and down ran the blood from his newly wounded arm.
2660. But the rest fought on, and a cry unquenchable arose.
2661. Then Aeneas leapt upon Aphareus, son of Caletor, that was turned toward him, and struck him on the throat with his sharp spear, and his head sank to one side, and his shield was hurled upon him and his helm withal, and death that slayeth the spirit encompassed him.
2662. Then Antilochus, biding his time, leapt upon Thoön, as he turned his back, and smote him with a thrust, and wholly severed the vein that runneth along the back continually until it reacheth the neck; this he severed wholly, and Thoön fell on his back in the dust, stretching out both his hands to his dear comrades.
2663. But Antilochus leapt upon him and set him to strip the armour from off his shoulders, looking warily around the while; for the Trojans encircled him and thrust from this side and from that upon his broad, shining shield; howbeit they prevailed not to pierce through and graze the tender flesh of Antilochus with the pitiless bronze; for mightily did Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, guard Nestor's son, even in the midst of many darts.
2664. For never aloof from the foe was Antilochus, but he ranged among them, nor ever was his spear at rest, but was ceaselessly brandished and shaken; and he ever aimed in heart to cast at some foeman, or rush upon him in close fight.
2665. But as he was aiming amid the throng he was not unmarked of Adamas, son of Asius, who smote him full upon the shield with a thrust of the sharp bronze, setting upon him from nigh at hand.
2666. But the spear-point was made of none avail by Poseidon, the dark - haired god, who begrudged it the life of Antilochus.
2667. And the one part of the spear abode here, like a charred stake, in the shield of Antilochus, and half lay on the ground; and Adamas shrank back into the throng of his comrades, avoiding fate.
2668. But Meriones followed after him as he went and cast with his spear, and smote him midway between the privy parts and the navel, where most of all Ares is cruel to wretched mortals.
2669. Even there he fixed his spear, and the other, leaning over the shaft which pierced him, writhed as a bull that herdsmen amid the mountains have bound with twisted withes and drag with them perforce; even so he, when he was smitten, writhed a little while, but not long, till the warrior Meriones came near and drew the spear forth from out his flesh; and darkness enfolded his eyes.
2670. Then in close fight Helenus smote Deïpyrus on the temple with a great Thracian sword, and tore away his helm, and the helm, dashed from his head, fell to the ground, and one of the Achaeans gathered it up as it rolled amid the feet of the fighters; and down upon the eyes of Deïpyrus came the darkness of night, and enfolded him.
2671. But the son of Atreus was seized with grief thereat, even Menelaus, good at the war-cry, and he strode forth with a threat against the prince, the warrior Helenus, brandishing his sharp spear, while the other drew the centre- piece of his bow.
2672. So the twain at the one moment let fly, the one with his sharp spear, and the other with an arrow from the string.
2673. Then the son of Priam smote Menelaus on the breast with his arrow, on the plate of his corselet, and off therefrom glanced the bitter arrow.
2674. And as from a broad shovel in a great threshing - floor the dark - skinned beans or pulse leap before the shrill wind and the might of the winnower; even so from the corselet of glorious Menelaus glanced aside the bitter arrow and sped afar.
2675. But the son of Atreus, Menelaus, good at the war-cry, cast, and smote Helenus on the hand wherewith he was holding the polished bow, and into the bow clean through the hand was driven the spear of bronze.
2676. Then back he shrank into the throng of his comrades, avoiding fate, letting his hand hang down by his side; and the ashen spear trailed after him.
2677. This then great-souled Agenor drew forth from his hand, and bound the hand with a strip of twisted sheep's wool, even a sling that his squire carried for him, the shepherd of the host.
2678. But Peisander made straight at glorious Menelaus; howbeit an evil fate was leading him to the end of death, to be slain by thee, Menelaus, in the dread conflict.
2679. And when they were come near, as they advanced one against the other, the son of Atreus missed, and his spear was turned aside; but Peisander thrust and smote the shield of glorious Menelaus, yet availed not to drive the bronze clean through, for the wide shield stayed it and the spear brake in the socket; yet had he joy at heart, and hope for victory.
2680. But the son of Atreus drew his silver - studded sword, and leapt upon Peisander; and he from beneath his shield grasped a goodly axe of fine bronze, set on a haft of olive - wood, long and well - polished; and at the one moment they set each upon the other.
2681. Peisander verily smote Menelaus upon the horn of his helmet with crest of horse - hair — on the topmost part beneath the very plume; but Menelaus smote him as he came against him, on the forehead above the base of the nose; and the bones crashed loudly, and the two eyeballs, all bloody, fell before his feet in the dust, and he bowed and fell; and Menelaus set his foot upon his breast, and despoiled him of his arms, and exulted, saying: ln such wise of a surety shall ye leave the ships of the Danaans, drivers of swift horses, ye overweening Trojans, insatiate of the dread din of battle.
2682. Aye, and of other despite and shame lack ye naught, wherewith ye have done despite unto me, ye evil dogs, and had no fear at heart of the grievous wrath of Zeus, that thundereth aloud, the god of hospitality, who shall some day destroy your high city.
2683. For ye bare forth wantonly over sea my wedded wife and therewithal much treasure, when it was with her that ye had found entertainment; and now again ye are full fain to fling consuming fire on the sea-faring ships, and to slay the Achaean warriors.
2684. Nay, but ye shall be stayed from your fighting, how eager soever ye be !
2685. Father Zeus, in sooth men say that in wisdom thou art above all others, both men and gods, yet it is from thee that all these things come; in such wise now dost thou shew favour to men of wantonness, even the Trojans, whose might is always froward, nor can they ever have their fill of the din of evil war.
2686. Of all things is there satiety, of sleep, and love, and of sweet song, and the goodly dance; of these things verily a man would rather have his fill than of war; but the Trojans are insatiate of battle.
2687. With this peerless Menelaus stripped from the body the bloody armour and gave it to his comrades, and himself went back again, and mingled with the foremost fighters.
2688. Then there leapt forth against him the son of king Pylaemenes, even Harpalion, that followed his dear father to Troy unto the war, but came not back again to his dear native land.
2689. He then thrust with his spear full upon the shield of the son of Atreus, from nigh at hand, yet availed not to drive the bronze clean through, and back he shrank into the throng of his comrades, avoiding fate, glancing warily on every side, lest some man should wound his flesh with the bronze.
2690. But as he drew back, Meriones let fly at him a bronze- tipped arrow, and smote him on the right buttock, and the arrow passed clean through even to the bladder beneath the bone.
2691. And sitting down where he was in the arms of his dear comrades he breathed forth his life, and lay stretched out like a worm on the earth; and the black blood flowed forth and wetted the ground.
2692. Him the great-hearted Paphlagonians tended, and setting him in a chariot they bare him to sacred Ilios, sorrowing the while, and with them went his father, shedding tears; but there was no blood - price gotten for his dead son.
2693. And for his slaying waxed Paris mightily wroth at heart, for among the many Paphlagonians Harpalion had been his host; and in wrath for his sake he let fly a bronze- tipped arrow.
2694. A certain Euchenor there was, son of Polyidus the seer, a rich man and a valiant, and his abode was in Corinth.
2695. He embarked upon his ship knowing full well the deadly fate to be, for often had his old sire, good Polyidus, told it him, to wit, that he must either perish of dire disease in his own halls, or amid the ships of the Achaeans be slain by the Trojans; wherefore he avoided at the same time the heavy fine of the Achaeans and the hateful disease, that he might not suffer woes at heart.
2696. Him Paris smote beneath the jaw, under the ear, and forthwith his spirit departed from his limbs, and hateful darkness gat hold of him.
2697. So fought they like unto blazing fire; but Hector, dear to Zeus, had not heard, nor wist at all that on the left of the ships his hosts were being slain by the Argives; and soon would the Achaeans have gotten them glory, of such might was the Enfolder and Shaker of Earth that urged on the Argives and withal aided them by his own strength.
2698. Nay, Hector pressed on where at the first he had leapt within the gate and the wall, and had burst the close ranks of the Danaan shield - men, even in the place where were the ships of Aias and Protesilaus, drawn up along the beach of the grey sea, and beyond them the wall was builded lowest; there, as in no place beside, the men and their horses waxed furious in fight.
2699. There the Boeotians and the Ionians, of trailing tunics, and the Locrians, and Phthians, and glorious Epeians, had much ado to stay his onset upon the ships, and availed not to thrust back from themselves goodly Hector, that was like a flame of fire, — even they that were picked men of the Athenians; and among them Menestheus, son of Peteos, was leader, and there followed with him Pheidas and Stichius and valiant Bias, while the Epeians were led by Meges, son of Phyleus, and Araphion and Dracius, and in the forefront of the Phthians were Medon and Podarces, staunch in fight.
2700. The one, verily, even Medon, was a bastard son of godlike Oïleus and brother of Aias, but he dwelt in Phylace, far from his native land, for that he had slain a man of the kin of his stepmother Eriopis, that Oïleus had to wife; and the other, Podarces, was the son of Iphiclus, son of Phylacus.
2701. These, harnessed in their armour, in the forefront of the great-souled Phthians, were fighting in defence of the ships together with the Boeotians.
2702. And Aias, the swift son of Oïleus, would no more in any wise depart from the side of Aias, son of Telamon, no not for an instant; but even as in fallow land two wine - dark oxen with one accord strain at the jointed plough, and about the roots of their horns oozeth up the sweat in streams — the twain the polished yoke alone holdeth apart as they labour through the furrow, till the plough cutteth to the limit or the field; even in such wise did the two Aiantes take their stand and abide each hard by the other's side.
2703. After the son of Telamon verily there followed many valiant hosts of his comrades, who would ever take from him his shield, whenso weariness and sweat came upon his limbs.
2704. But the Locrians followed not with the great-hearted son of Oïleus, for their hearts abode not steadfast in close fight, seeing they had no brazen helms with thick plumes of horse - hair, neither round shields, nor spears of ash, but trusting in bows and well - twisted slings of sheep's wool had they followed with him to Ilios; with these thereafter they shot thick and fast, and sought to break the battalions of the Trojans.
2705. So the one part in front with their war-gear, richly dight, fought with the Trojans and with Hector in his harness of bronze, and the others behind kept shooting from their cover; and the Trojans bethought them no more of fight, for the arrows confounded them.
2706. Then in sorry wise would the Trojans have given ground from the ships and huts unto windy Ilios, had not Polydamas drawn nigh to bold Hector, and said: Hector, hard to deal with art thou, that thou shouldest hearken to words of persuasion.
2707. Forasmuch as god has given to thee as to none other works of war, therefore in counsel too art thou minded to have wisdom beyond all; but in no wise shalt thou be able of thine own self to compass all things.
2708. To one man hath God given works of war, to another the dance, to another the lyre and song, and in the breast of another Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, putteth a mind of understanding, wherefrom many men get profit, and many he saveth; but he knoweth it best himself.
2709. So will I speak what seemeth to me to be best.
2710. Behold all about thee blazeth a circle of war, and the great-souled Trojans, now that they have passed over the wall, are some of them standing aloof with their arms, and others are fighting, fewer men against more, scattered among the ships.
2711. Nay, fall thou back, and call hither all the bravest.
2712. Then shall we consider all manner of counsel, whether we shall fall upon the many - benched ships, if so be the god willeth to give us victory, or thereafter shall return unscathed back from the ships.
2713. Verily, for myself, I fear lest the Achaeans shall pay back the debt of yesterday, seeing there abideth by the ships a man insatiate of war, who no longer, methinks, will hold him utterly aloof from battle.
2714. So spake Polydamas, and his prudent counsel was well pleasing unto Hector, and forthwith he leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground; and he spake and addressed him with winged words: Polydamas, do thou hold back here all the bravest, but I will go thither and confront the war, and quickly will I come again, when to the full I have laid on them my charge.
2715. So spake he, and set forth, in semblance like a snowy mountain, and with loud shouting sped he through the Trojans and allies.
2716. And they hasted one and all toward the kindly Polydamas, son of Panthous when they heard the voice of Hector.
2717. But he ranged through the foremost fighters, in quest of Deïphobus, and the valiant prince Helenus, and Adamas, son of Asius, and Asius, son of Hyrtacus, if haply he might find them.
2718. But he found them no more in any wise unscathed or free from bane, but some were lying at the sterns of the ships of the Achaeans, slain by the hands of the Argives, and some were within the wall, smitten by darts or wounded with spear-thrusts.
2719. But one he presently found on the left of the tearful battle, even goodly Alexander, the lord of fair - tressed Helen, heartening his comrades and urging them on to fight; and he drew near and spake to him with words of shame: Evil Paris, most fair to look upon, thou that art mad after women, thou beguiler, where, I pray thee, is Deïphobus, and the valiant prince Helenus, and Adamas, son of Asius, and Asius, son of Hyrtacus?
2720. Aye, and where, tell me, is Othryoneus?
2721. Now is steep Ilios wholly plunged into ruin; now, thou mayest see, is utter destruction sure.
2722. Then spake unto him again godlike Alexander: Hector, seeing it is thy mind to blame one in whom is no blame, at some other time have I haply withdrawn me from war rather than now, for my mother bare not even me wholly a weakling.
2723. For from the time thou didst rouse the battle of thy comrades beside the ships, even from that time we abide here and have dalliance with the Danaans ceaselessly; but our comrades are dead of whom thou makest question.
2724. Only Deïphobus and the valiant prince Helenus have departed, both of them smitten in the arm with long spears; yet the son of Cronos warded off death.
2725. But now lead thou on whithersoever thy heart and spirit bid thee, and as for us, we will follow with thee eagerly, nor, methinks, shall we be anywise wanting in valour, so far as we have strength; but beyond his strength may no man fight, how eager soever he be.
2726. So spake the warrior, and turned his brother's mind; and they set out to go where the battle and the din were fiercest, round about Cebriones and peerless Polydamas, and Phalces, and Orthaeus, and godlike Polyphetes, and Palmys, and Ascanius, and Morys, son of Hippotion, who had come from deep-soiled Ascania on the morn before to relieve their fellows, and now Zeus roused them to fight.
2727. And they came on like the blast of direful winds that rusheth upon the earth beneath the thunder of father Zeus, and with wondrous din mingleth with the sea, and in its track are many surging waves of the loud - resounding sea, high - arched and white with foam, some in the van and after them others; even so the Trojans, in close array, some in the van and after them others, flashing with bronze, followed with their leaders.
2728. And Hector, son of Priam, led them, the peer of Ares, the bane of mortals.
2729. Before him he held his shield that was well - balanced upon every side, his shield thick with hides, whereon abundant bronze had been welded, and about his temples waved the crest of his shining helm.
2730. And everywhere on this side and on that he strode forward and made trial of the battalions, if so be they would give way before him, as he advanced under cover of his shield; yet could he not confound the heart in the breast of the Achaeans.
2731. And Aias came on with long strides, and was first to challenge him: Good sir, draw nigh; wherefore seekest thou thus vainly to affright the Argives?
2732. In no wise, I tell thee, are we ignorant of battle, but by the evil scourge of Zeus were we Achaeans subdued.
2733. Verily, thy heart hopeth, I ween, to despoil our ships, but be sure we too have hands to defend them.
2734. In good sooth your well - peopled city is like, ere that, to be taken and laid waste beneath our hands.
2735. And for thine own self, I declare that the day is near when in flight thou shalt pray to father Zeus and the other immortals, that thy fair - maned horses may be swifter than falcons — they that shall bear thee citywards, coursing in dust over the plain.
2736. Even as he thus spake, there flew forth a bird upon the right hand, an eagle of lofty flight; and thereat the host of the Achaeans shouted aloud, heartened by the omen; but glorious Hector made answer: Aias, witless in speech, thou braggart, what a thing hast thou said.
2737. I would that I mine own self were all my days as surely the son of Zeus, that beareth the aegis, and my mother were the queenly Hera, and that I were honoured even as are Athene and Apollo, as verily this day beareth evil for the Argives, one and all; and among them shalt thou too be slain, if thou have the heart to abide my long spear, that shall rend thy lily - like skin; and thou shalt glut with thy fat and thy flesh the dogs and birds of the Trojans, when thou art fallen amid the ships of the Achaeans.
2738. So spake he, and led the way; and they followed after with a wondrous din, and the host shouted behind.
2739. And the Argives over against them shouted in answer, and forgat not their valour, but abode the oncoming of the best of the Trojans; and the clamour of the two hosts went up to the aether and the splendour of Zeus.
2740. And the cry of battle was not unmarked of Nestor, albeit at his wine, but he spake winged words to the son of Asclepius:
2741. Bethink thee, goodly Machaon, how these things are to be; louder in sooth by the ships waxes the cry of lusty youths.
2742. Howbeit do thou now sit where thou art and quaff the flaming wine, until fair - tressed Hecamede shall heat for thee a warm bath, and wash from thee the clotted blood, but I will go straightway to a place of outlook and see what is toward.
2743. So spake he and took the well - wrought shield of his son, horse - taming Thrasymedes, that was lying in the hut, all gleaming with bronze; but the son had the shield of his father.
2744. And he grasped a valorous spear, tipped with sharp bronze, and took his stand outside the hut, and forthwith saw a deed of shame, even the Achaeans in rout and the Trojans high of heart driving them; and the wall of the Achaeans was broken down.
2745. And as when the great sea heaveth darkly with a soundless swell, and forebodeth the swift paths of the shrill winds, albeit but vaguely, nor do its waves roll forward to this side or to that until some settled gale cometh down from Zeus; even so the old man pondered, his mind divided this way and that, whether he should haste into the throng of the Danaans of swift steeds, or go after Agamemnon, son of Atreus, shepherd of the host.
2746. And as he pondered, this thing seemed to him the better — to go after the son of Atreus.
2747. But the others meanwhile were fighting on and slaying one another, and about their bodies rang the stubborn bronze, as they thrust one at the other with swords and two -edged spears.
2748. And Nestor was met by the kings, fostered of Zeus, as they went up from the ships, even all they that had been smitten with the bronze, the son of Tydeus, and Odysseus, and Atreus' son, Agamemnon.
2749. Far apart from the battle were their ships drawn up on the shore of the grey sea; for these had they drawn up to land in the foremost row, but had builded the wall close to the hindmost.
2750. For albeit the beach was wide, yet might it in no wise hold all the ships, and the host was straitened; wherefore they had drawn up the ships row behind row, and had filled up the wide mouth of all the shore that the headlands shut in between them.
2751. The kings therefore were faring all in one body, leaning each on his spear, to look upon the war and the combat, and grieved were the hearts in their breasts.
2752. And old Nestor met them, and made the spirit to quail in the breasts of the Achaeans.
2753. Then lord Agamemnon lifted up his voice and spake to him: O Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Achaeans, wherefore hast thou left the war, the bane of men, and come hither?
2754. I fear me lest in sooth mighty Hector make good his word and the threats wherewith on a time he threatened us, as he spake amid the Trojans, even that he would not return to Ilios from the ships till he had burned the ships with fire and furthermore slain the men.
2755. On this wise spake he, and now all this is verily being brought to pass.
2756. Out upon it !
2757. surely the other well - greaved Achaeans are laying up wrath against me in their hearts, even as doth Achilles, and have no mind to fight by the sterns of the ships.
2758. Then made answer to him the horseman Nestor of Gerenia: Yea, verily, these things have now been brought to pass and are here at hand, neither could Zeus himself, that thundereth on high, fashion them otherwise.
2759. For, lo, the wall has been thrown down, wherein we put our trust that it should be an unbreakable bulwark for our ships and ourselves.
2760. And the foemen at the swift ships maintain a ceaseless fight, and make no end; nor couldst thou any more tell, wert thou to look never so closely, from what side the Achaeans are driven in rout, so confusedly are they slain, and the cry of battle goeth up to heaven.
2761. But for us, let us take thought how these things are to be, if so be wit may aught avail.
2762. But into the war I bid not that we should enter; in no wise may a wounded man do battle.
2763. Then again made answer the king of men, Agamemnon: Nestor, seeing they are fighting at the sterns of the ships, and the well - built wall hath availed not, nor in any wise the trench, whereat the Danaans laboured sore, and hoped in their hearts that it would be an unbreakable bulwark for their ships and for themselves — even so, I ween, must it be the good pleasure of Zeus, supreme in might, that the Achaeans should perish here far from Argos, and have no name.
2764. I knew it when with a ready heart he was aiding the Danaans, and I know it now when he is giving glory to our foes, even as to the blessed gods, and hath bound our might and our hands.
2765. Nay, come, even as I shall bid, let us all obey.
2766. Let us drag down the ships that are drawn up in the first line hard by the sea, and let us draw them all forth into the bright sea, and moor them afloat with anchor-stones, till immortal night shall come, if so be that even at her bidding the Trojans will refrain from war; and thereafter might we drag down all the ships.
2767. For in sooth I count it not shame to flee from ruin, nay, not though it be by night.
2768. Better it is if one fleeth from ruin and escapeth, than if he be taken.
2769. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows Odysseus of many wiles addressed him: Son of Atreus, what a word hath escaped the barrier of thy teeth !
2770. Doomed man that thou art, would that thou wert in command of some other, inglorious army, and not king over us, to whom Zeus hath given, from youth right up to age, to wind the skein of grievous wars till we perish, every man of us.
2771. Art thou in truth thus eager to leave behind thee the broad - wayed city of the Trojans, for the sake of which we endure many grievous woes?
2772. Be silent, lest some other of the Achaeans hear this word, that no man should in any wise suffer to pass through his mouth at all, no man who hath understanding in his heart to utter things that are right, and who is a sceptred king to whom hosts so many yield obedience as are the Argives among whom thou art lord.
2773. But now have I altogether scorn of thy wits, that thou speakest thus, seeing thou biddest us, when war and battle are afoot, draw down our well - benched ships to the sea, that so even more than before the Trojans may have their desire, they that be victors even now, and that on us utter destruction may fall.
2774. For the Achaeans will not maintain their fight once the ships are drawn down to the sea, but will ever be looking away, and will withdraw them from battle.
2775. Then will thy counsel prove our bane, thou leader of hosts.
2776. To him then made answer, Agamemnon, king of men:
2777. Odysseus, in good sooth thou hast stung my heart with harsh reproof; yet I urge not that against their will the sons of the Achaeans should drag the well - benched ships down to the sea.
2778. But now I would there were one who might utter counsel better than this of mine, be he young man or old; right welcome were it unto me.
2779. Then among them spake also Diomedes, good at the war -cry:
2780. Near by is that man; not long shall we seek him, if so be ye are minded to give ear, and be no wise vexed and wroth, each one of you, for that in years I am the youngest among you.
2781. Nay, but of a goodly father do I too declare that I am come by lineage, even of Tydeus, whom in Thebe the heaped - up earth covereth.
2782. For to Portheus were born three peerless sons, and they dwelt in Pleuron and steep Calydon, even Agrius and Melas, and the third was the horseman Oeneus, that was father to my father, and in valour was pre-eminent among them.
2783. He verily abode there, but my father went wandering to Argos, and there was settled, for so I ween was the will of Zeus and the other gods.
2784. And he wedded one of the daughters of Adrastus, and dwelt in a house rich in substance, and abundance was his of wheat - bearing fields, and many orchards of trees round about, and withal many sheep; and with his spear he excelled all the Argives.
2785. Of these things it must be that ye have heard, whether I speak sooth.
2786. Wherefore ye shall not say that by lineage I am a coward and a weakling, and so despise my spoken counsel, whatsoever I may speak aright.
2787. Come, let us go down to the battle, wounded though we be, since needs we must.
2788. Thereafter will we hold ourselves aloof from the fight, beyond the range of missiles, lest haply any take wound on wound; but the others will we spur on and send into battle, even them that hitherto have done pleasure to their resentment, and that stand aloof and fight not.
2789. So spake he, and they readily hearkened to him and obeyed.
2790. So they set out to go, and the king of men, Agamemnon, led them.
2791. And no blind watch did the famed Shaker of Earth keep, but went with them in likeness of an old man, and he laid hold of the right hand of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, and spake, and addressed him with winged words: Son of Atreus, now in sooth, methinks, doth the baneful heart of Achilles rejoice within his breast, as he beholdeth the slaughter and rout of the Achaeans, seeing he hath no understanding, no, not a whit.
2792. Nay, even so may he perish, and a god bring him low.
2793. But with thee are the blessed gods in no wise utterly wroth; nay, even yet, I ween, shall the leaders and rulers of the Trojans raise the dust of the wide plain, and thyself behold them fleeing to the city from the ships and huts.
2794. So saying, he shouted mightily, as he sped over the plain.
2795. Loud as nine thousand warriors, or ten thousand, cry in battle when they join in the strife of the War-god, even so mighty a shout did the lord, the Shaker of Earth, send forth from his breast.
2796. and in the heart of each man of the Achaeans he put great strength, to war and fight unceasingly.
2797. Now Hera of the golden throne, standing on a peak of Olympus, therefrom had sight of him, and forthwith knew him as he went busily about in the battle where men win glory, her own brother and her lord's withal; and she was glad at heart.
2798. And Zeus she marked seated on the topmost peak of many - fountained Ida, and hateful was he to her heart.
2799. Then she took thought, the ox-eyed, queenly Hera, how she might beguile the mind of Zeus that beareth the aegis.
2800. And this plan seemed to her mind the best — to go to Ida, when she had beauteously adorned her person, if so be he might desire to lie by her side and embrace her body in love, and she might shed a warm and gentle sleep upon his eyelids and his cunning mind.
2801. So she went her way to her chamber, that her dear son Hephaestus had fashioned for her, and had fitted strong doors to the door - posts with a secret bolt, that no other god might open.
2802. Therein she entered, and closed the bright doors.
2803. With ambrosia first did she cleanse from her lovely body every stain, and anointed her richly with oil, ambrosial, soft, and of rich fragrance; were this but shaken in the palace of Zeus with threshold of bronze, even so would the savour thereof reach unto earth and heaven.
2804. Therewith she annointed her lovely body, and she combed her hair, and with her hands pIaited the bright tresses, fair and ambrosial, that streamed from her immortal head.
2805. Then she clothed her about in a robe ambrosial, which Athene had wrought for her with cunning skill, and had set thereon broideries full many; and she pinned it upon her breast with brooches of gold, and she girt about her a girdle set with an hundred tassels, and in her pierced ears she put ear-rings with three clustering drops; and abundant grace shone therefrom.
2806. And with a veil over all did the bright goddess veil herself, a fair veil, all glistering, and white was it as the sun; and beneath her shining feet she bound her fair sandals.
2807. But when she had decked her body with all adornment, she went forth from her chamber, and calling to her Aphrodite, apart from the other gods, she spake to her, saying:
2808. Wilt thou now hearken to me, dear child, in what I shall say?
2809. or wilt thou refuse me, being angered at heart for that I give aid to the Danaans and thou to the Trojans?
2810. Then made answer to her Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus: Hera, queenly goddess, daughter of great Cronos, speak what is in thy mind; my heart bids me fulfill it, if fulfill it I can, and it is a thing that hath fulfillment.
2811. Then with crafty thought spake to her queenly Hera:
2812. Give me now love and desire, wherewith thou art wont to subdue all immortals and mortal men.
2813. For I am faring to visit the limits of the all - nurturing earth, and Oceanus, from whom the gods are sprung, and mother Tethys, even them that lovingly nursed and cherished me in their halls, when they had taken me from Rhea, what time Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, thrust Cronos down to dwell beneath earth and the unresting sea.
2814. Them am I faring to visit, and will loose for them their endless strife, since now for a long time's space they hold aloof one from the other from the marriage - bed and from love, for that wrath hath come upon their hearts.
2815. If by words I might but persuade the hearts of these twain, and bring them back to be joined together in love, ever should I be called dear by them and worthy of reverence.
2816. To her again spake in answer laughter - loving Aphrodite:
2817. It may not be that I should say thee nay, nor were it seemly; for thou sleepest in the arms of mightiest Zeus.
2818. She spake, and loosed from her bosom the broidered zone, curiously - wrought, wherein are fashioned all manner of allurements; therein is love, therein desire, therein dalliance — beguilement that steals the wits even of the wise.
2819. This she laid in her hands, and spake, and addressed her:
2820. Take now and lay in thy bosom this zone, curiously - wrought, wherein all things are fashioned; I tell thee thou shalt not return with that unaccomplished, whatsoever in thy heart thou desirest.
2821. So spake she, and ox -eyed, queenly Hera smiled, and smiling laid the zone in her bosom.
2822. She then went to her house, the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, but Hera darted down and left the peak of Olympus; on Pieria she stepped and lovely Emathia, and sped over the snowy mountains of the Thracian horsemen, even over their topmost peaks, nor grazed she the ground with her feet; and from Athos she stepped upon the billowy sea, and so came to Lemnos, the city of godlike Thoas.
2823. There she met Sleep, the brother of Death; and she clasped him by the hand, and spake and addressed him: Sleep, lord of all gods and of all men, if ever thou didst hearken to word of mine, so do thou even now obey, and I will owe thee thanks all my days.
2824. Lull me to sleep the bright eyes of Zeus beneath his brows, so soon as I shall have lain me by his side in love.
2825. And gifts will I give thee, a fair throne, ever imperishable, wrought of gold, that Hephaestus, mine own son, the god of the two strong arms, shall fashion thee with skill, and beneath it shall he set a foot - stool for the feet, whereon thou mayest rest thy shining feet when thou quaffest thy wine.
2826. Then sweet Sleep made answer to her, saying: Hera, queenly goddess, daughter of great Cronos, another of the gods, that are for ever, might I lightly lull to sleep, aye, were it even the streams of the river Oceanus, from whom they all are sprung; but to Zeus, son of Cronos, will I not draw nigh, neither lull him to slumber, unless of himself he bid me.
2827. For ere now in another matter did a behest of thine teach me a lesson, on the day when the glorious son of Zeus, high of heart, sailed forth from Ilios, when he had laid waste the city of the Trojans.
2828. I, verily, beguiled the mind of Zeus, that beareth the aegis, being shed in sweetness round about him, and thou didst devise evil in thy heart against his son, when thou hadst roused the blasts of cruel winds over the face of the deep, and thereafter didst bear him away unto well - peopled Cos, far from all his kinsfolk.
2829. But Zeus, when he awakened, was wroth, and flung the gods hither and thither about his palace, and me above all he sought, and would have hurled me from heaven into the deep to be no more seen, had Night not saved me —
2830. Night that bends to her sway both gods and men.
2831. To her I came in my flight, and besought her, and Zeus refrained him, albeit he was wroth, for he had awe lest he do aught displeasing to swift Night.
2832. And now again thou biddest me fulfill this other task, that may nowise be done.
2833. To him then spake again ox -eyed, queenly Hera: Sleep, wherefore ponderest thou of these things in thine heart?
2834. Deemest thou that Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, will aid the Trojans, even as he waxed wroth for the sake of Heracles, his own son?
2835. Nay, come, I will give thee one of the youthful Graces to wed to be called thy wife, even Pasithea, for whom thou ever longest all thy days.
2836. So spake she, and Sleep waxed glad, and made answer saying:
2837. Come now, swear to me by the inviolable water of Styx, and with one hand lay thou hold of the bounteous earth, and with the other of the shimmering sea, that one and all they may be witnesses betwixt us twain, even the gods that are below with Cronos, that verily thou wilt give me one of the youthful Graces, even Pasithea, that myself I long for all my days.
2838. So spake he, and the goddess, white - armed Hera, failed not to hearken, but sware as he bade, and invoked by name all the gods below Tartarus, that are called Titans.
2839. But when she had sworn and made an end of the oath, the twain left the cities of Lemnos and Imbros, and clothed about in mist went forth, speeding swiftly on their way.
2840. To many - fountained Ida they came, the mother of wild creatures, even to Lectum, where first they left the sea; and the twain fared on over the dry land, and the topmost forest quivered beneath their feet.
2841. There Sleep did halt, or ever the eyes of Zeus beheld him, and mounted up on a fir-tree exceeding tall, the highest that then grew in Ida; and it reached up through the mists into heaven.
2842. Thereon he perched, thick - hidden by the branches of the fir, in the likeness of a clear-voiced mountain bird, that the gods call Chalcis, and men Cymindis.
2843. But Hera swiftly drew nigh to topmost Gargarus, the peak of lofty Ida, and Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, beheld her.
2844. And when he beheld her, then love encompassed his wise heart about, even as when at the first they had gone to the couch and had dalliance together in love, their dear parents knowing naught thereof.
2845. And he stood before her, and spake, and addressed her: Hera, with what desire art thou thus come hither down from Olympus?
2846. Lo, thy horses are not at hand, neither thy chariot, whereon thou mightest mount.
2847. Then with crafty mind the queenly Hera spake unto him: I am faring to visit the limits of the all - nurturing earth, and Oceanus, from whom the gods are sprung, and mother Tethys, even them that lovingly nursed me and cherished me in their halls.
2848. Them am I faring to visit, and will loose for them their endless strife, since now for long time's apace they hold aloof one from the other from the marriage - bed and from love, for that wrath hath fallen upon their hearts.
2849. And my horses stand at the foot of many - fountained Ida, my horses that shall bear me both over the solid land and the waters of the sea.
2850. But now it is because of thee that I am come hither down from Olympus, lest haply thou mightest wax wroth with me hereafter, if without a word I depart to the house of deep-flowing Oceanus.
2851. Then in answer spake to her Zeus, the cloud -gatherer.
2852. Hera, thither mayest thou go even hereafter.
2853. But for us twain, come, let us take our joy couched together in love; for never yet did desire for goddess or mortal woman so shed itself about me and overmaster the heart within my breast — nay, not when I was seized with love of the wife of Ixion, who bare Peirithous, the peer of the gods in counsel; nor of Danaë of the fair ankles, daughter of Acrisius, who bare Perseus, pre-eminent above all warriors; nor of the daughter of far - famed Phoenix, that bare me Minos and godlike Rhadamanthys; nor of Semele, nor of Alcmene in Thebes, and she brought forth Heracles, her son stout of heart, and Semele bare Dionysus, the joy of mortals; nor of Demeter, the fair - tressed queen; nor of glorious Leto; nay, nor yet of thine own self, as now I love thee, and sweet desire layeth hold of me.
2854. Then with crafty mind the queenly Hera spake unto him: Most dread son of Cronos, what a word hast thou said.
2855. If now thou art fain to be couched in love on the peaks of Ida, where all is plain to view, what and if some one of the gods that are for ever should behold us twain as we sleep, and should go and tell it to all the gods?
2856. Then verily could not I arise from the couch and go again to thy house; that were a shameful thing.
2857. But if thou wilt, and it is thy heart's good pleasure, thou hast a chamber, that thy dear son Hephaestus fashioned for thee, and fitted strong doors upon the door-posts.
2858. Thither let us go and lay us down, since the couch is thy desire.
2859. Then in answer to her spake Zeus, the cloud - gatherer: Hera, fear thou not that any god or man shall behold the thing, with such a cloud shall I enfold thee withal, a cloud of gold.
2860. Therethrough might not even Helios discern us twain, albeit his sight is the keenest of all for beholding.
2861. Therewith the son of Cronos clasped his wife in his arms, and beneath them the divine earth made fresh - sprung grass to grow, and dewy lotus, and crocus, and hyacinth, thick and soft, that upbare them from the ground.
2862. Therein lay the twain, and were clothed about with a cloud, fair and golden, wherefrom fell drops of glistering dew.
2863. Thus in quiet slept the Father on topmost Gargarus, by sleep and love overmastered, and clasped in his arms his wife.
2864. But sweet Sleep set out to run to the ships of the Argives to bear word to the Enfolder and Shaker of Earth.
2865. And he came up to him, and spake winged words, saying:
2866. With a ready heart now, Poseidon, do thou bear aid to the Danaans, and vouchsafe them glory, though it be for a little space, while yet Zeus sleepeth; for over him have I shed soft slumber, and Hera hath beguiled him to couch with her in love.
2867. So spake he and departed to the glorious tribes of men, but Poseidon he set on yet more to bear aid to the Danaans.
2868. Forthwith then he leapt forth amid the foremost, and cried aloud: Argives, are we again in good sooth to yield victory to Hector, son of Priam, that he may take the ships and win him glory?
2869. Nay, even so he saith, and vaunteth that it shall be, for that Achilles abideth by the hollow ships, filled with wrath at heart.
2870. Howbeit him shall we in no wise miss overmuch if we others bestir ourselves to bear aid one to the other.
2871. Nay, come, even as I shall bid, let us all obey.
2872. In the shields that are best in the host and largest let us harness ourselves, and our heads let us cover with helms all - gleaming, and in our hands take the longest spears, and so go forth.
2873. And I will lead the way, nor, methinks, will Hector, son of Priam, longer abide, how eager soever he be.
2874. And whoso is a man, staunch in fight, but hath a small shield on his shoulder, let him give it to a worser man, and himself harness him in a large shield.
2875. So spake he, and they readily hearkened to him, and obeyed.
2876. And the kings themselves, albeit they were wounded, set them in array, even the son of Tydeus, and Odysseus, and Atreus' son Agamemnon.
2877. And going throughout all the host, they made exchange of battle - gear.
2878. In good armour did the good warrior harness him, and to the worse they gave the worse.
2879. Then when they had clothed their bodies in gleaming bronze, they set forth, and Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, led them, bearing in his strong hand a dread sword, long of edge, like unto the lightning, wherewith it is not permitted that any should mingle in dreadful war, but terror holds men aloof therefrom.
2880. But the Trojans over against them was glorious Hector setting in array.
2881. Then verily were strained the cords of war's most dreadful strife by dark - haired Poseidon and glorious Hector, bearing aid the one to the Trojans, the other to the Argives.
2882. And the sea surged up to the huts and ships of the Argives, and the two sides clashed with a mighty din.
2883. Not so loudly bellows the wave of the sea upon the shore, driven up from the deep by the dread blast of the North Wind, nor so loud is the roar of blazing fire in the glades of a nuountain when it leapeth to burn the forest, nor doth the wind shriek so loud amid the high crests of the oaks — the wind that roareth the loudest in its rage — as then was the cry of Trojans and Achaeans, shouting in terrible wise as they leapt upon each other.
2884. At Aias did glorious Hector first cast his spear, as he was turned full toward him, and missed him not, but smote him where the two baldrics — one of his shield and one of his silver - studded sword — were stretched across his breast; and they guarded his tender flesh.
2885. And Hector waxed wroth for that the swift shaft had flown vainly from his hand, and back he shrank into the throng of his comrades, avoiding fate.
2886. But thereupon as he drew back, great Telamonian Aias smote him with a stone; for many there were, props of the swift ships, that rolled amid their feet as they fought; of these he lifted one on high, and smote Hector on the chest over the shield - rim, hard by the neck, and set him whirling like a top with the blow; and he spun round and round.
2887. And even as when beneath the blast of father Zeus an oak falleth uprooted, and a dread reek of brimstone ariseth therefrom — then verily courage no longer possesseth him that looketh thereon and standeth near by, for dread is the bolt of great Zeus — even so fell mighty Hector forthwith to the ground in the dust.
2888. And the spear fell from his hand, but the shield was hurled upon him, and the helm withal, and round about him rang his armour dight with bronze.
2889. Then with loud shouts they ran up, the sons of the Achaeans, hoping to drag him off, and they hurled their spears thick and fast; but no one availed to wound the shepherd of the host with thrust or with cast, for ere that might be, the bravest stood forth to guard him, even Polydamas, and Aeneas, and goodly Agenor, and Sarpedon, leader of the Lycians, and peerless Glaucus withal, and of the rest was no man unheedful of him, but before him they held their round shields; and his comrades lifted him up in their arms and bare him forth from the toil of war until he came to the swift horses that stood waiting for him at the rear of the battle and the conflict, with their charioteer and chariot richly dight.
2890. These bare him groaning heavily toward the city.
2891. But when they were now come to the ford of the fair - flowing river, even eddying Xanthus, that immortal Zeus begat, there they lifted him from the chariot to the ground and poured water upon him.
2892. And he revived, and looked up with his eyes, and kneeling on his knees he vomited forth black blood.
2893. Then again he sank back upon the ground, and both his eyes were enfolded in black night; and the blow still overwhelmed his spirit.
2894. But when the Argives saw Hector withdrawing, they leapt yet the more upon the Trojans, and bethought them of battle.
2895. Then far the first did swift Aias, son of Oïleus, leap upon Satnius and wound him with a thrust of his sharp spear, even the son of Enops, whom a peerless Naiad nymph conceived to Enops, as he tended his herds by the banks of Satnioeis.
2896. To him did the son of Oïleus, famed for his spear, draw nigh, and smite him upon the flank; and he fell backward, and about him Trojans and Danaans joined in fierce conflict.
2897. To him then came Polydamas, wielder of the spear, to bear him aid, even the son of Panthous, and he cast and smote upon the right shoulder Prothoënor, son of Areïlycus, and through the shoulder the mighty spear held its way; and he fell in the dust and clutched the ground with his palm.
2898. And Polydamas exulted over him in terrible wise, and cried aloud: Hah, methinks, yet again from the strong hand of the great-souled son of Panthous hath the spear leapt not in vain.
2899. Nay, one of the Argives hath got it in his flesh, and leaning thereon for a staff; methinks, will he go down into the house of Hades.
2900. So spake he, but upon the Argives came sorrow by reason of his exulting, and beyond all did he stir the soul of Aias, wise of heart, the son of Telamon, for closest to him did the man fall.
2901. Swiftly then he cast with his bright spear at the other, even as he was drawing back.
2902. And Polydamas himself escaped black fate, springing to one side; but Archelochus, son of Antenor, received the spear; for to him the gods purposed death.
2903. Him the spear smote at the joining of head and neck on the topmost joint of the spine, and it shore off both the sinews.
2904. And far sooner did his head and mouth and nose reach the earth as he fell, than his legs and knees.
2905. Then Aias in his turn called aloud to peerless Polydamas:
2906. Bethink thee, Polydamas, and tell me in good sooth, was not this man worthy to be slain in requital for Prothoënor?
2907. No mean man seemeth he to me, nor of mean descent, but a brother of Antenor, tamer of horses, or haply a son; for he is most like to him in build.
2908. So spake he, knowing the truth full well, and sorrow seized the hearts of the Trojans.
2909. Then Acamas, as he bestrode his brother, smote with a thrust of his spear the Boeotian Promachus, who was seeking to drag the body from beneath him by the feet.
2910. And over him Acamas exulted in terrible wise, and cried aloud:
2911. Ye Argives, that rage with the bow, insatiate of threatenings, not for us alone, look you, shall there be toil and woe, but even in like manner shall ye too be slain.
2912. Mark how your Promachus sleepeth, vanquished by my spear, to the end that the blood - price of my brother be not long unpaid.
2913. Aye, and for this reason doth a man pray that a kinsman be left him in his halls, to be a warder off of ruin.
2914. So spake he, and upon the Argives came sorrow by reason of his exuIting, and beyond all did he stir the soul of wise - hearted Peneleos.
2915. He rushed upon Acamas, but Acamas abode not the onset of the prince Peneleos.
2916. Howbeit Peneleos thrust and smote Ilioneus, son of Phorbas, rich in herds, whom Hermes loved above all the Trojans and gave him wealth; and to him the mother bare Ilioneus, an only child.
2917. Him then did Peneleos smite beneath the brow at the roots of the eyes, and drave out the eyeball, and the shaft went clean through the eye and through the nape ot the neck, and he sank down stretching out both his hands.
2918. But Peneleos drawing his sharp sword let drive full upon his neck, and smote off to the the ground the head with the helmet, and still the mighty spear stood in the eye; and holding it on high like a poppy- head he shewed it to the Trojans, and spake a word exultingly:
2919. Tell, I pray you, ye Trojans, to the dear father and the mother of lordly Ilioneus to make wailing in their halls, for neither will the wife of Promachus, son of Alegenor, rejoice in the coming of her dear husband, when we youths of the Achdeans return with our ships from out of Troy-land.
2920. So spake he, and thereat tremb
2921. Iing seized the limbs of them all, and each man gazed about to see how he might escape utter destruction.
2922. Te Il me now, ye Muses, that have dwellings on Olympus, who was first of the Achaeans to bear away the bloody spoils of warriors, when once the famed Shaker of Earth had turned the battle.
2923. Aias verily was first, the son of Telamon.
2924. He smote Hyrtius, the son of Gyrtius, leader of the Mysians stalwart of heart; and Antilochus stripped the spoils from Phalces and Mermerus, and Meriones slew Morys and Hippotion, and Teucer laid low Prothoön and Periphetes,; thereafter Atreus' son smote with a thrust in the flank Hyperenor, shepherd of the host, and the bronze let forth the bowels, as it clove through, and his soul sped hastening through the stricken wound, and darkness enfolded his eyes.
2925. But most men did Aias slay, the swift son of Oïleus; for there was none other like him to pursue with speed of foot amid the rout of men, when Zeus turned them to flight.
2926. But when the Trojans in their flight had passed over the palisade and the trench, and many had been vanquished beneath the hands of the Danaans, then beside their chariots they stayed, and were halted, pale with fear, terror-stricken; and Zeus awoke on the peaks of Ida beside Hera of the golden throne.
2927. Then he sprang up, and stood, and saw Trojans alike and Achaeans, these in rout, and the Argives driving them on from the rear, and amid them the lord Poseidon.
2928. And Hector he saw lying on the plain, while about him sat his comrades, and he was gasping with painful breath, distraught in mind, and vomiting blood; for not the weakest of the Achaeans was it that had smitten him.
2929. At sight of him the father of men and gods had pity, and with a dread glance from beneath his brows he spake to Hera, saying: Hera, that art hard to deal with, it is the craft of thine evil wiles that hath stayed goodly Hector from the fight, and hath driven the host in rout.
2930. Verily I know not but thou shalt yet be the first to reap the fruits of thy wretched ill-contriving, and I shall scourge thee with stripes.
2931. Dost thou not remember when thou wast hung from on high, and from thy feet I suspended two anvils, and about thy wrists cast a band of gold that might not be broken?
2932. And in the air amid the clouds thou didst hang, and the gods had indignation throughout high Olympus; howbeit they availed not to draw nigh and loose thee.
2933. Nay, whomsoever I caught, I would seize and hurl from the threshold until he reached the earth, his strength all spent.
2934. Yet not even so was my heart eased of its ceaseless pain for godlike Heracles, whom thou when thou hadst leagued thee with the North Wind and suborned his blasts, didst send over the unresting sea, by thine evil devising, and thereafter didst bear him away unto well - peopled Cos.
2935. Him did I save from thence, and brought again to horse - pasturing Argos, albeit after he had laboured sore.
2936. Of these things will I mind thee yet again, that thou mayest cease from thy beguilings, to the end that thou mayest see whether they anywise avail thee, the dalliance and the couch, wherein thou didst lie with me when thou hadst come forth from among the gods, and didst beguile me.
2937. So spake he, and the ox-eyed, queenly Hera shuddered; and she spake and addressed him with winged words: Hereto now be Earth my witness and the broad Heaven above, and the down - flowing water of Styx, which is the greatest and most dread oath for the blessed gods, and thine own sacred head, and the couch of us twain, couch of our wedded love, whereby I verily would never forswear myself — not by my will doth Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, work harm to the Trojans and Hector, and give succour to their foes.
2938. Nay, I ween, it is his own soul that urgeth and biddeth him on, and he hath seen the Achaeans sore - bested by their ships and taken pity upon them.
2939. But I tell thee, I would counsel even him to walk in that way, wherein thou, O lord of the dark cloud, mayest lead him.
2940. So spake she, and the father of men and gods smiled, and made answer, and spake to her with winged words:
2941. If in good sooth, O ox-eyed, queenly Hera, thy thought hereafter were to be one with my thought as thou sittest among the immortals, then would Poseidon, how contrary soever his wish might be, forthwith bend his mind to follow thy heart and mine.
2942. But if verily thou speakest in frankness and in truth, go thou now among the tribes of gods and call Iris to come hither, and Apollo, famed for his bow, that she may go amid the host of the brazen - coated Achaeans, and bid the lord Poseidon that he cease from war, and get him to his own house; but let Phoebus Apollo rouse Hector to the fight, and breathe strength into him again, and make him forget the pains that now distress his heart; and let him drive the Achaeans back once more, when he has roused in them craven panic; so shall they flee and fall among the many - benched ships of Achilles, son of Peleus, and he shall send forth his comrade Patroclus, howbeit him shall glorious Hector slay with the spear before the face of Ilios, after himself hath slain many other youths, and among them withal my son, goodly Sarpedon.
2943. And in wrath for Patroclus shall goodly Achilles slay Hector.
2944. Then from that time forth shall I cause a driving back of the Trojans from the ships evermore continually, until the Achaeans shall take steep Ilios through the counsels of Athene.
2945. But until that hour neither do I refrain my wrath, nor will I suffer any other of the immortals to bear aid to the Danaans here, until the desire of the son of Peleus be fulfilled, even as I promised at the first and bowed my head thereto, on the day when the goddess
2946. Thetis clasped my knees, beseeching me to do honour to Achilles, sacker of cities.
2947. So spake he, and the goddess, white - armed Hera, failed not to hearken, but went her way from the mountains of Ida unto high Olympus.
2948. And even as swiftly darteth the mind of a man who hath travelled over far lands and thinketh in the wisdom of his heart, Would I were here, or there, and many are the wishes he conceiveth: even so swiftly sped on in her eagerness the queenly Hera; and she came to steep Olympus, and found the immortal gods gathered together in the house of Zeus, and at sight of her they all sprang up, and greeted her with cups of welcome.
2949. She on her part let be the others, but took the cup from Themis, of the fair cheeks, for she ran first to meet her, and spake, and addressed her with winged words: Hera, wherefore art thou come?
2950. Thou art as one distraught.
2951. In good sooth the son of Cronos hath affrighted thee, he thine own husband.
2952. Then made answer to her, the goddess, white - armed Hera:
2953. Ask me not at large concerning this, O goddess Themis; of thyself thou knowest what manner of mood is his, how over- haughty and unbending.
2954. Nay, do thou begin for the gods the equal feast in the halls, and this shalt thou hear amid all the immortals, even what manner of evil deeds Zeus declareth.
2955. In no wise, methinks, will it delight in like manner the hearts of all, whether mortals or gods, if so be any even now still feasteth with a joyful mind.
2956. When she had thus spoken, queenly Hera sate her down, and wroth waxed the gods throughout the hall of Zeus.
2957. And she laughed with her lips, but her forehead above her dark brows relaxed not, and, moved with indignation, she spake among them all:
2958. Fools, that in our witlessness are wroth against Zeus !
2959. In sooth we are even yet fain to draw nigh unto him and thwart him of his will by word or by constraint, but he sitteth apart and recketh not, neither giveth heed thereto; for he deemeth that among the immortal gods he is manifestly supreme in might and strength.
2960. Wherefore content ye yourselves with whatsoever evil thing he sendeth upon each.
2961. Even now I deem that sorrow hath been wrought for Ares, seeing that his son, dearest of men to him, hath perished in battle, even Ascalaphus, whom mighty Ares declareth to be his own.
2962. So spake she, but Ares smote his sturdy thighs with the flat of his hands, and with wailing spake, and said:
2963. Count it not blame for me now, O ye that have dwellings on Olympus, if I go to the ships of the Achaeans and avenge the slaying of my son, even though it be my fate to be smitten with the bolt of Zeus, and to lie low in blood and dust amid the dead.
2964. So spake he and bade Terror and Rout yoke his horses, and himself did on his gleaming armour.
2965. Then would yet greater and more grievous wrath and anger have been stirred between Zeus and the immortals, had not Athene, seized with fear for all the gods, sped forth through the doorway, and left the throne whereon she sat, and taken the helm from the head of Ares and the shield from his shoulders; and she took from his strong hand the spear of bronze, and set it down, and with words rebuked furious Ares:
2966. Thou madman, distraught of wit, thou art beside thyself !
2967. Verily it is for naught that thou hast ears for hearing, and thine understanding and sense of right are gone from thee.
2968. Hearest thou not what the goddess, white - armed Hera, saith, she that is but now come from Olympian Zeus?
2969. Wouldest thou thyself fulfill the measure of manifold woes, and so return to Olympus despite thy grief, perforce, and for all the rest sow the seeds of grievous woe?
2970. For he will forthwith leave the Trojans, high of heart, and the Achaeans, and will hie him to Olympus to set us all in tumult, and will lay hands upon each in turn, the guilty alike and him in whom is no guilt.
2971. Wherefore now I bid thee put away thy wrath for thine own son.
2972. For ere now many a one more excellent than he in might and strength of hand hath been slain, or will yet be slain; and a hard thing it is to preserve the lineage and offspring of men.
2973. She spake she, and made furious Ares to sit down upon his throne.
2974. But Hera called Apollo forth from out the hall, and Iris, that is the messenger of the immortal gods; and she spake and addressed them with winged words:
2975. Zeus biddeth you twain go to Ida with all the speed ye may; and when ye have come, and looked upon the face of Zeus, then do ye whatsoever he may order and command.
2976. When she had thus spoken queenly Hera returned again and sate her down upon her throne; and the twain sprang up and sped forth upon their way.
2977. To many - fountained Ida they came, mother of wild beasts, and found Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, seated on topmost Gargarus; and about him a fragrant cloud was wreathed.
2978. The twain then came before the face of Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, and at sight of them his heart waxed nowise wroth, for that they had speedily obeyed the words of his dear wife.
2979. And to Iris first he spake winged words:
2980. Up, go, swift Iris; unto the lord Poseidon bear thou all these tidings, and see thou tell him true.
2981. Bid him cease from war and battle, and go to join the tribes of gods, or into the bright sea.
2982. And if so be he will not obey my words, but shall set them at naught, let him bethink him then in mind and heart, lest, how strong soever he be, he have no hardihood to abide my on - coming; for I avow me to be better far than he in might, and the elder born.
2983. Yet his heart counteth it but a little thing to declare himself the peer of me of whom even the other gods are adread.
2984. So spake he, and wind - footed, swift Iris failed not to hearken, but went down from the hills of Ida to sacred Ilios.
2985. And as when from the clouds there flieth snow or chill hail, driven by the blast of the North Wind that is born in the bright heaven, even so fleetly sped in her eagerness swift Iris; and she drew nigh, and spake to the glorious Shaker of Earth, saying: A message for thee, O Earth - Enfolder, thou dark - haired god, have I come hither to bring from Zeus, that beareth the aegis.
2986. He biddeth thee cease from war and battle, and go to join the tribes of gods, or into the bright sea.
2987. And if so be thou wilt not obey his words, but shalt set them at naught, he threateneth that he will himself come hither to set his might against thine in battle; and he biddeth thee avoid thee out of his hands; for he avoweth him to be better far than thou in might, and the elder born.
2988. Yet thy heart counteth it but a little thing to declare thyself the peer of him, of whom even the other gods are adread.
2989. Then, stirred to hot anger, the glorious Shaker of Earth spake unto her:
2990. Out upon it, verily strong though he be he hath spoken overweeningly, if in sooth by force and in mine own despite he will restrain me that am of like honour with himself.
2991. For three brethren are we, begotten of Cronos, and born of Rhea, — Zeus, and myself, and the third is Hades, that is lord of the dead below.
2992. And in three - fold wise are all things divided, and unto each hath been apportioned his own domain.
2993. I verily, when the lots were shaken, won for my portion the grey sea to be my habitation for ever, and Hades won the murky darkness, while Zeus won the broad heaven amid the air and the clouds; but the earth and high Olympus remain yet common to us all.
2994. Wherefore will I not in any wise walk after the will of Zeus; nay in quiet let him abide in his third portion, how strong soever he be.
2995. And with might of hand let him not seek to affright me, as though I were some coward.
2996. His daughters and his sons were it better for him to threaten with blustering words, even them that himself begat, who perforce will hearken to whatsoever he may bid.
2997. Then wind - footed swift Iris answered him:
2998. Is it thus in good sooth, O Earth - Enfolder, thou dark - haired god, that I am to bear to Zeus this message, unyielding and harsh, or wilt thou anywise turn thee; for the hearts of the good may be turned?
2999. Thou knowest how the Erinyes ever follow to aid the elder - born.
3000. Then answered her again Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth: Goddess Iris, this word of thine is right fitly spoken; and a good thing verily is this, when a messenger hath an understanding heart.
3001. But herein dread grief cometh upon my heart and soul, whenso any is minded to upbraid with angry words one of like portion with himself, to whom fate hath decreed an equal share.
3002. Howbeit for this present will I yield, despite mine indignation; yet another thing will I tell thee, and make this threat in my wrath: if in despite of me, and of Athene, driver of the spoil, and of Hera, and Hermes, and lord Hephaestus, he shall spare steep Ilios, and shall be minded not to lay it waste, neither to give great might to the Argives, let him know this, that between us twain shall be wrath that naught can appease.
3003. So saying, the Shaker of Earth left the host of the Achaeans, and fared to the sea and plunged therein; and the Achaean warriors missed him sore.
3004. Then unto Apollo spake Zeus, the cloud - gatherer:
3005. Go now, dear Phoebus, unto Hector, harnessed in bronze, for now is the Enfolder and Shaker of Earth gone into the bright sea, avoiding our utter wrath; else verily had others too heard of our strife, even the gods that are in the world below with Cronos.
3006. But this was better for both, for me and for his own self, that ere then he yielded to my hands despite his wrath, for not without sweat would the issue have been wrought.
3007. But do thou take in thine hands the tasselled aegis, and shake it fiercely over the Achaean warriors to affright them withal.
3008. And for thine own self, thou god that smitest afar, let glorious Hector be thy care, and for this time's space rouse in him great might, even until the Achaeans shall come in flight unto their ships and the Hellespont.
3009. From that moment will I myself contrive word and deed, to the end that yet again the Achaeans may have respite from their toil.
3010. So spake he, nor was Apollo disobedient to his father s bidding, but went down from the hills of Ida, like a fleet falcon, the slayer of doves, that is the swiftest of winged things.
3011. He found the son of wise - hearted Priam, even goodly Hector, sitting up, for he lay no longer, and he was but newly gathering back his spirit, and knew his comrades round about him, and his gasping and his sweat had ceased, for the will of Zeus, that beareth the aegis, revived him.
3012. And Apollo, that worketh afar, drew nigh unto him, and said: Hector, son of Priam, why is it that thou apart from the rest abidest here fainting?
3013. Is it haply that some trouble is come upon thee?
3014. Then, his strength all spent, spake to him Hector of the flashing helm:
3015. Who of the gods art thou, mightiest one, that dost make question of me face to face?
3016. Knowest thou not that at the sterns of the Achaeans' ships as I made havoc of his comrades, Aias, good at the war-cry, smote me on the breast with a stone, and made me cease from my furious might?
3017. Aye, and I deemed that on this day I should behold the dead and the house of Hades, when I had gasped forth my life.
3018. Then spake to him again the lord Apollo, that worketh afar:
3019. Be now of good cheer, so mighty a helper hath the son of Cronos sent forth from Ida to stand by thy side and succour thee, even me, Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, that of old ever protect thee, thyself and the steep citadel withal.
3020. But come now, bid thy many charioteers drive against the hollow ships their swift horses, and I will go before and make smooth all the way for the chariots, and will turn in flight the Achaean warriors.
3021. So saying, he breathed great might into the shepherd of the host.
3022. And even as when a stalled horse that has fed his fill at the manger, breaketh his halter, and runneth stamping over the plain — being wont to bathe him in the fair - flowing river — and exulteth; on high doth he hold his head and about his shoulders his mane floateth streaming, and as he glorieth in his splendour his knees nimbly bear him to the haunts and pastures of mares; even so swiftly plied Hector his feet and knees, urging on his charioteers, when he had heard the voice of the god.
3023. But as when dogs and country - folk pursue a horned stag or a wild goat, but a sheer rock or a shadowy thicket saveth him from them, nor is it their lot to find him; and then at their clamour a bearded lion showeth himself in the way, and forthwith turneth them all back despite their eagerness: even so the Danaans for a time ever followed on in throngs, thrusting with swords and two -edged spears, but when they saw Hector going up and down the ranks of men, then were they seized with fear, and the spirits of all men sank down to their feet.
3024. Then among them spake Thoas, son of Andraemon, far the best of the Aetolians, well - skilled in throwing the javelin, but a good man too in close fight, and in the place of assembly could but few of the Achaeans surpass him, when the young men were striving in debate.
3025. He with good intent addressed their gathering, and spake among them:
3026. Now look you, verily a great marvel is this that mine eyes behold, how that now he is risen again and hath avoided the fates, even Hector.
3027. In sooth the heart of each man of us hoped that he had died beneath the hands of Aias, son of Telamon.
3028. But lo, some one of the gods hath again delivered and saved Hector, who verily hath loosed the knees of many Danaans, as, I deem, will befall even now, since not without the will of loud - thundering Zeus doth he stand forth thus eagerly as a champion.
3029. Nay come, even as I shall bid, let us all obey.
3030. The multitude let us bid return to the ships, but ourselves, all we that declare us to be the the best in the host, let us take our stand, if so be we first may face him, and thrust him back with our outstretched spears; methinks, for all his eagerness he will fear at heart to enter into the throng of the Danaans.
3031. So spake he, and they readily hearkened and obeyed.
3032. They that were in the company of Aias and prince Idomeneus, and Teucer, and Meriones, and Meges, the peer of Ares, called to the chieftains, and marshalled the fight, fronting Hector and the Trojans, but behind them the multitude fared back to the ships of the Achaeans.
3033. Then the Trojans drave forward in close throng, and Hector led them, advancing with long strides, while before him went Phoebus Apollo, his shoulders wrapped in cloud, bearing the fell aegis, girt with shaggy fringe, awful, gleaming bright, that the smith Hephaestus gave to Zeus to bear for the putting to rout of warriors; this Apollo bare in his hands as he led on the host.
3034. And the Argives in close throng abode their coming, and the war - cry rose shrill from either side, and the arrows leapt from the bow-string, and many spears, hurled by bold hands, were some of them lodged in the flesh of youths swift in battle, and many of them, or ever they reached the white flesh, stood fixed midway in the earth, fain to glut themselves with flesh.
3035. Now so long as Phoebus Apollo held the aegis moveless in his hands, even so long the missiles of either side reached their mark and the folk kept falling; but when he looked full in the faces of the Danaans of swift horses, and shook the aegis, and himself shouted mightily withal, then made he their hearts to faint within their breasts, and they forgat their furious might.
3036. And as when two wild beasts drive in confusion a herd of kine or a great flock of sheep in the darkness of black night, when they have come upon them suddenly, and a herdsman is not by, even so were the Achaeans driven in rout with no might in them; for upon them Apollo had sent panic, and unto the Trojans and Hector was he giving glory.
3037. Then man slew man as the fight was scattered.
3038. Hector laid low Stichius and Arcesilaus, the one a leader of the brazen - coated Boeotians, and the other a trusty comrade of great- souled Menestheus; and Aeneas slew Medon and Iasus.
3039. The one verily, Medon, was a bastard son of godlike Oïleus, and brother of Aias, but he dwelt in Phylace far from his native land, for that he had slain a man of the kin of his stepmother, Eriopis that Oïleus had to wife; and Iasus was a captain of the Athenians, and was called the son of Sphelus, son of Bucolus.
3040. And Mecisteus did Polydamas slay, and Polites slew Echius in the forefront of the fight, and Clonius was slain of goodly Agenor.
3041. And Deïochus did Paris smite from behind, as he fled amid the foremost fighters, upon the base of the shoulder, and drave the bronze clean through.
3042. While they were stripping the armour from these, meanwhile the Achaeans were flinging themselves into the digged trench and against the palisade, fleeing this way and that, and were getting them within their wall perforce.
3043. And Hector shouted aloud, and called to the Trojans:
3044. Speed ye against the ships, and let be the blood - stained spoils.
3045. Whomsoever I shall mark holding aloof from the ships on the further side, on the very spot shall I devise his death, nor shall his kinsmen and kinswomen give him his due meed of fire in death, but the dogs shall rend him in front of our city.
3046. So saying, with a downward sweep of his arm he smote his horses with the lash, and called aloud to the Trojans along the ranks; and they all raised a shout, and even with him drave the steeds that drew their chariots, with a wondrous din; and before them Phoebus Apollo lightly dashed down with his feet the banks of the deep trench, and cast them into the midst thereof, bridging for the men a pathway long and broad, even as far as a spear-cast, when a man hurleth, making trial of his strength.
3047. Therethrough they poured forward rank on rank, and before them went Apollo, bearing the priceless aegis.
3048. And full easily did he cast down the wall of the Achaeans, even as when a boy scattereth the sand by the sea, one that makes of it a plaything in his childishness, and then again confounds it with hands and feet as he maketh sport: so lightly didst thou, O archer Phoebus, confound the long toil and labour of the Achaeans, and on themselves send rout.
3049. So then beside their ships the Danaans halted, and were stayed, calling one upon the other, and lifting up their hands to all the gods they made fervent prayer, each man of them; and most of all prayed Nestor of Gerenia, the warder of the Achaeans, stretching forth his two hands to the starry heaven: O father Zeus, if ever any man of us in wheat - bearing Argos burned to thee fat thigh - pieces of bull or of ram with the prayer that he might return, and thou didst promise and nod thy head thereto, be thou now mindful of these things, and ward from us, O Olympian god, the pitiless day of doom, nor suffer the Achaeans thus to be vanquished by the Trojans.
3050. So he spake in prayer, and Zeus the counsellor thundered aloud, hearing the prayer of the aged son of Neleus.
3051. But the Trojans, when they heard the thunder of Zeus that beareth the aegis, leapt yet the more upon the Argives and bethought them of battle.
3052. And as when a great billow of the broad - wayed sea sweepeth down over the bulwarks of a ship, whenso it is driven on by the might of the wind, which above all maketh the waves to swell; even so did the Trojans with a great cry rush down over the wall, — they in their cars, but the Achaeans high up on the decks of their black ships to which they had climbed, fought therefrom with long pikes that lay at hand for them upon the ships for sea-fighting, — jointed pikes, shod at the tip with bronze.
3053. And Patroclus, so long as the Achaeans and Trojans were fighting about the wall aloof from the swift ships, even so long sat in the hut of kindly Eurypylus, and was making him glad with talk, and on his grievous wound was spreading simples to assuage his dark pangs.
3054. But when he saw the Trojans rushing upon the wall, while the Danaans with loud cries turned in flight, then he uttered a groan, and smote his two thighs with the flat of his hands, and with wailing spake, saying:
3055. Eurypylus, in no wise may I abide longer with thee here, albeit thy need is sore; for lo, a mighty struggle hath arisen.
3056. Nay, as for thee, let thy squire bring thee comfort, but I will hasten to Achilles, that I may urge him on to do battle.
3057. Who knows but that, heaven helping, I may rouse his spirit with my persuading?
3058. A good thing is the persuasion of a comrade.
3059. When he had thus spoken his feet bare him on; but the Achaeans firmly abode the oncoming of the Trojans, yet availed not to thrust them back from the ships, albeit they were fewer, nor ever could the Trojans break the battalions of the Danaans and make way into the midst of the huts and the ships.
3060. But as the carpenter's line maketh straight a ship's timber in the hands of a cunning workman, that is well skilled in all manner of craft by the promptings of Athene, so evenly was strained their war and battle.
3061. So fought they on, divers of them about divers ships, but Hector made straight for glorious Aias.
3062. They twain were labouring in the toil of war about the same ship, nor might the one drive back the other and burn the ship with fire, nor the other thrust him in back, now that a god had brought him nigh.
3063. Then did glorious Aias cast his spear and smite upon the breast Caletor, son of Clytius, as he was bearing fire against the ship; and he fell with a thud, and the torch dropped from out his hand.
3064. But Hector, when his eyes beheld his cousin fallen in the dust in front of the black ship, called to the Trojans and Lycians with a loud shout: Ye Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians that fight in close combat, in no wise give ye ground from battle in this strait: nay, save ye the son of Clytius, lest so be the Achaeans strip him of his armour, now that he is fallen amid the gathering of the ships.
3065. So saying, he hurled at Aias with his bright spear; him he missed, but Lycophron, Mastor's son, a squire of Aias from Cythera, who dwelt with him, for that he had slain a man in sacred Cythera —him Hector smote upon the head above the ear with the sharp bronze, even as he stood near Aias, and backward in the dust he fell to the ground from off the stern of the ship and his limbs were loosed.
3066. And Aias shuddered, and spake unto his brother: Good Teucer, verily a true comrade of us twain hath been laid low, even the son of Mastor, whom while he abode with us, being come from Cythera, we honoured in our halls even as our own parents.
3067. Him hath great-souled Hector slain.
3068. Where now are thy arrows that bring swift death, and the bow that Phoebus Apollos gave thee?
3069. So spake he, and the other hearkened, and ran, and took his stand close beside him, bearing in his hand his bent - back bow and the quiver that held his arrows; and full swiftly did he let fly his shafts upon the Trojans.
3070. And he smote Cleitus, the glorious son of Peisenor, comrade of Polydamas, the lordly son of Panthous, even as he was holding the reins in his hand, and was busied with his horses; for thither was he driving them, where the most battalions were being driven in rout, thus doing pleasure unto Hector and the Trojans.
3071. But full swiftly upon himself came evil that not one of them could ward off, how fain soever they were.
3072. For upon the back of his neck lighted the arrow fraught with groanings, and he fell from the chariot, and thereat the horses swerved aside, rattling the empty car.
3073. And the prince Polydamas swiftly marked it, and was first to stride toward the horses.
3074. These he gave to Astynous, son of Protiaon, and straitly enjoined him to hold them near at hand, watching him the while; and he himself went back and mingled with the foremost fighters.
3075. Then Teucer drew forth another arrow for Hector, harnessed in bronze, and would have made him cease from battle by the ships of the Achaeans, had he but smitten him while he was showing his prowess and taken away his life.
3076. But he was not unmarked of the wise mind of Zeus, who guarded Hector, and took the glory from Teucer, son of Telamon.
3077. For Zeus brake the well - twisted string upon the goodly bow, even as he was drawing it against Hector, and his arrow heavy with bronze was turned aside, and the bow fell from his hand.
3078. Then Teucer shuddered, and spake to his brother:
3079. Now look you, in good sooth a god is utterly bringing to naught the counsels of our battle, in that he hath cast the bow from my hand, and hath broken the newly - twisted string that I bound fast this morning that it might avail to bear the arrows that should leap thick and fast therefrom.
3080. Then great Telamonian Aias answered him: Aye, friend, but leave thou thy bow and thy many arrows to lie where they are, seeing that a god has confounded them, in malice toward the Danaans; but take thou in thy hand a long spear and a shield upon thy shoulder, and do battle with the Trojans, and urge on the rest of the folk.
3081. Verily not without a struggle, for all they have overpowered us, shall they take our well - benched ships; nay, let us bethink us of battle.
3082. So spake he, and Teucer laid the bow again within the hut, but about his shoulders put a fourfold shield, and upon his mighty head set a well - wrought helmet with horse - hair crest; and terribly did the plume nod from above; and he took a valorous spear, tipped with sharp bronze, and went his way, and swiftly ran and took his stand by the side of Aias.
3083. But when Hector saw that Teucer's shafts had been brought to naught, to Trojans and Lycians he called with a loud shout, Ye Trojans and Lycians and Dardanians that fight in close combat, be men, my friends, and bethink you of furious valour amid the hollow ships; for verily mine eyes have seen how Zeus hath brought to naught the shafts of a man that is a chieftain.
3084. Full easy to discern is the aid Zeus giveth to men, both to whomso he vouchsafeth the glory of victory, and whomso again he minisheth, and hath no mind to aid, even as now he minisheth the might of the Argives, and beareth aid to us.
3085. Nay, fight ye at the ships in close throngs, and if so be any of you, smitten by dart or thrust, shall meet death and fate, let him lie in death.
3086. No unseemly thing is it for him to die while fighting for his country.
3087. Nay, but his wife is safe and his children after him, and his house and his portion of land are unharmed, if but the Achaeans be gone with their ships to their dear native land.
3088. So saying, he aroused the strength and spirit of every man.
3089. And Aias again, over against him called to his comrades:
3090. Shame on you, Argives, now is it sure that we must either perish utterly or find deliverance by thrusting back the peril from the ships.
3091. Think ye haply that if Hector of the flashing helm take the ships, ye shall come afoot each man of you to his own native land?
3092. Hear ye not Hector urging on all his host in his fury to burn the ships?
3093. Verily it is not to the dance that he biddeth them come, but to battle.
3094. And for us there is no counsel or device better than this, that in close combat we bring our hands and our might against theirs.
3095. Better is it once for all either to die or live, than long to be straitened in dread conflict thus bootlessly beside the ships at the hands of men that be meaner.
3096. So saying, he aroused the strength and spirit of every man.
3097. Then Hector slew Schedius, son of Perimedes, a leader of the Phocians, and Aias slew Laodamas, the leader of the footmen, the glorious son of Antenor; and Polydamas laid low Otus of Cyllene, comrade of Phyleus' son, captain of the great-souled Epeians.
3098. And Meges saw, and leapt upon him, but Polydamas swerved from beneath him and him Meges missed; for Apollo would not suffer the son of Panthous to be vanquished amid the foremost fighters; but with a spear-thrust he smote Croesmus full upon the breast.
3099. And he fell with a thud, and the other set him to strip the armour from his shoulders.
3100. Meanwhile upon him leapt Dolops, well skilled with the spear, the son of Lampus, whom Lampus, son of Laomedon, begat, even his bravest son, well skilled in furious might; he it was that then thrust with his spear full upon the shield of Phyleus' son, setting upon him from nigh at hand.
3101. But his cunningly - wrought corselet saved him, the corselet that he was wont to wear, fitted with plates of mail.
3102. This Phyleus had brought from out of Ephyre, from the river Seleïs.
3103. For a guest - friend of his, the king of men Euphetes, had given it him that he might wear it in war, a defence against foe-men; and this now warded death from the body of his son.
3104. Then Meges thrust with his sharp spear upon the topmost socket of the helm of bronze with horse - hair plume which Dolops wore, and shore therefrom the plume of horse - hair, and all the plume, bright with its new scarlet dye, fell in the dust.
3105. Now while Meges abode and fought with Dolops, and yet hoped for victory, meanwhile warlike Menelaus came to bear him aid, and he took his stand on one side with his spear, unmarked of Dolops, and cast and smote him on the shoulder from behind; and the spear in its fury sped through his breast, darting eagerly onward, and he fell upon his face; and the twain made for him to strip from his shoulders his armour wrought of bronze.
3106. But Hector called to his kinsmen, one and all, and first did he chide Hicetaon's son, strong Melanippus.
3107. He until this time had been wont to feed his kine of shambling gait in Percote, while the foemen were yet afar, but when the curved ships of the Danaans came, he returned back to Ilios, and was pre-eminent among the Trojans; and he dwelt in the house of Priam, who held him in like honour with his own children.
3108. Him did Hector chide, and spake and addressed him, saying:
3109. In good sooth, Melanippus, are we to be thus slack?
3110. Hath thine own heart no regard for thy kinsman that is slain?
3111. Seest thou not in what wise they are busied about the armour of Dolops?
3112. Nay, come thou on; for no longer may we fight with the Argives from afar, till either we slay them, or they utterly take steep Ilios, and slay her people.
3113. So saying, he led the way, and the other followed with him, a godlike man.
3114. And the Argives did great Telamonian Aias urge on, saying:
3115. My friends, be men, and take ye shame in your hearts, and have shame each of the other in the fierce conflict.
3116. Of men that have shame more are saved than are slain; but from them that flee springeth neither glory nor any avail.
3117. So spake he, and they even of themselves were eager to ward off the foe, but they laid up his word in their hearts, and fenced in the ships with a hedge of bronze; and against them Zeus urged on the Trojans.
3118. Then Menelaus, good at the war-cry, exhorted Antilochus: Antilochus, none other of the Achaeans is younger than thou, nor swifter of foot, nor valiant as thou art in fight; I would thou mightest leap forth, and smite some man of the Trojans.
3119. He spake, and hasted back again himself, but aroused the other, and Antilochus leapt forth from amid the foremost fighters and, glancing warily about him, hurled with his bright spear, and back did the Trojans shrink from the warrior as he cast.
3120. Not in vain did he let fly his spear, but smote Hicetaon's son, Melanippus, high of heart, as he was coming to the battle, upon the breast beside the nipple; and he fell with a thud, and darkness enfolded his eyes.
3121. And Antilochus sprang upon him, as a hound that darteth upon a wounded fawn, that a hunter with sure aim hath smitten as it leapt from its lair, and hath loosed its limbs; even in such wise upon thee, O Melanippus, leapt Antilochus staunch in fight, to strip from thee thine armour.
3122. Howbeit he was not unseen of goodly Hector, who came running to meet him amid the battle; and Antilochus abode not, swift warrior though he was, but fled like a wild beast that hath wrought some mischief — one that hath slain a hound or a herdsman beside his kine, and fleeth before the throng of men be gathered together; even so fled the son of Nestor; and the Trojans and Hector with wondrous shouting poured forth upon him their darts fraught with groanings; but he turned and stood, when he had reached the host of his comrades.
3123. But the Trojans, like ravening lions, rushed upon the ships and were fulfilling the behests of Zeus, who ever roused great might in them, but made the hearts of the Argives to melt, and took away their glory, while he spurred on the others.
3124. For his heart was set on giving glory to Hector, son of Priam, to the end that he might cast upon the beaked ships unwearied, wondrous - blazing fire, and so fulfill to the uttermost the presumptuous prayer of Thetis.
3125. Even for this was Zeus the counsellor waiting, that his eyes might behold the glare of a burning ship; for from that time forth was he to ordain a driving - back of the Trojans from the ships, and to grant glory to the Danaans.
3126. With this intent he was rousing against the hollow ships Hector son of Priam, that was himself full eager.
3127. And he was raging like Ares, wielder of the spear, or as when consuming fire rageth among the mountains in the thickets of a deep wood; and foam came forth about his mouth, and his two eyes blazed beneath his dreadful brows, and round about his temples terribly shook the helm of Hector as he fought; for Zeus out of heaven was himself his defender, and vouchsafed him honour and glory, alone as he was amid so many warriors.
3128. For brief was his span of life to be, since even now Pallas Athene was hastening on the day of his doom beneath the might of the son of Peleus.
3129. But fain was he to break the ranks of men, making trial of them wheresoever he saw the greatest throng and the goodliest arms.
3130. Yet not even so did he avail to break them, for all he was so eager; for they abode firm- fixed as it were a wall, like a crag, sheer and great, hard by the grey sea, that abideth the swift paths of the shrill winds, and the swelling waves that belch forth against it; even so the Danaans withstood the Trojans steadfastly, and fled not.
3131. But Hector shining all about as with fire leapt among the throng, and fell upon them; even as when beneath the clouds a fierce - rushing wave, swollen by the winds, falleth upon a swift ship, and she is all hidden by the foam thereof, and the dread blast of the wind roareth against the sail, and the hearts of the sailors shudder in their fear, for that by little are they borne forth from death; even so were the hearts of the Achaeans rent within their breasts.
3132. But he fell upon them like a lion of baneful mind coming against kine, that are grazing in the bottom - land of a great marsh, and there is no counting them, and among them is a herdsman that is as yet unskilled to fight with a wild beast over the carcase of a sleek heifer that hath been slain: he verily walketh ever by their side, now abreast of the foremost of the kine, and now of the hindmost, but the lion leapeth upon the midmost, and devoureth a heifer, and thereat they all flee in terror; even so in wondrous wise were the Achaeans one and all then driven in wondrous rout by Hector and father Zeus, albeit Hector slew one only man, Periphetes of Mycenae, the dear son of Copreus, that had been wont to go on messages from king Eurystheus to the mighty Heracles.
3133. Of him, a father baser by far, was begotten a son goodlier in all manner of excellence, both in fleetness of foot and in fight, and in mind he was among the first of the men of Mycenae; he it was who then yielded to Hector the glory of victory.
3134. For, as he turned back, he tripped upon the rim of the shield that himself bare, a shield that reached to the feet, a defence against javelins: thereon he stumbled and fell backward, and about his temples his helm rang wondrously as he fell.
3135. And Hector was quick to mark it, and ran, and stood close beside him, and fixed his spear in his breast, and slew him hard by his dear comrades; and they availed not to aid him, albeit they sorrowed for their comrade; for themselves were sore adread of goodly Hector.
3136. Now were they got among the ships, and the outermost ships encircled them, even they that had been drawn up in the first line; but their foes rushed on.
3137. And the Argives gave way perforce from the outermost ships, but abode there beside their huts, all in one body, and scattered not throughout the camp; for shame withheld them and fear; and unceasingly they called aloud one to the other.
3138. And above all others Nestor of Gerenia, the warder of the Achaeans, besought each man, adjuring him by them that begat him, saying:
3139. My friends, play the man, and take in your hearts shame of other men, and be ye mindful, each man of you, of children and wife, of possessions and of his parents, whether in the case of any they be living or be dead.
3140. For the sake of them that are not here with us do I now beseech you to stand firm, and turn not back in flight.
3141. So saying, he aroused the strength and spirit of every man, and from their eyes Athene thrust away the wondrous cloud of mist, and mightily did light come to them from either hand, both from the side of the ships and from that of evil war.
3142. And all beheld Hector, good at the war-cry, and his comrades, alike they that stood in the rear and fought not, and all they that did battle by the swift ships.
3143. Now was it no more pleasing to the soul of great-hearted Aias to stand in the place where the rest of the sons of the Achaeans stood aloof, but he kept faring with long strides up and down the decks of the ships, and he wielded in his hands a long pike for sea-fighting, a pike jointed with rings, of a length two and twenty cubits.
3144. And as a man well - skilled in horsemanship harnesseth together four horses chosen out of many, and driveth them in swift course from the plain toward a great city along a highway, while many marvel at him, both men-folk and women, and ever with sure step he leapeth, and passeth from horse to horse, while they speed on; even so Aias kept ranging with long strides over the many decks of the swift ships, and his voice went up to heaven, as ever with terrible cries he called to the Danaans to defend their ships and huts.
3145. Nor did Hector abide amid the throng of the mail - clad Trojans, but as a tawny eagle darteth upon a flock of winged fowl that are feeding by a river's bank — a flock of wild geese, or cranes, or long - necked swans, even so Hector made for a dark - prowed ship, rushing straight thereon; and from behind Zeus thrust him on with exceeding mighty hand, and aroused the host together with him.
3146. Then again keen battle was set afoot beside the ships.
3147. Thou wouldst have deemed that all unwearied and unworn they faced one another in war, so furiously did they fight.
3148. And in their fighting they were minded thus: The Achaeans verily deemed that they should never escape from out the peril, but should perish, while for the Trojans, the heart in each man's breast hoped that they should fire the ships and slay the Achaean warriors.
3149. Such were their thoughts as they stood, each host against the other.
3150. But Hector laid hold of the stern of a seafaring ship, a fair ship, swift upon the brine, that had borne Protesilaus to Troy, but brought him not back again to his native land.
3151. About his ship Achaeans and Trojans were slaying one another in close combat, nor did they longer hold aloof and thus endure the flight of arrows and darts, but standing man against man in oneness of heart, they fought with sharp battle - axes and hatchets, and with great swords and two -edged spears.
3152. And many goodly blades, bound with dark thongs at the hilt, fell to the ground, some from the hands and some from the shoulders of the warriors as they fought; and the black earth flowed with blood.
3153. But Hector, when he had grasped the ship by the stern, would not loose his hold, but kept the ensign in his hands, and called to the Trojans: Bring fire, and therewithal raise ye the war - cry all with one voice; now hath Zeus vouchsafed us a day that is recompense for all — to take the ships that came hither in despite of the gods, and brought us many woes, by reason of the cowardice of the elders, who, when I was eager to fight at the sterns of the ships, kept me back, and withheld the host.
3154. But if Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, then dulled our wits, now of himself he urgeth and giveth command.
3155. So spake he, and they leapt the more upon the Argives.
3156. But Aias no longer abode, for he was sore beset with darts, but, ever foreboding death, gave ground a little along the bridge of seven feet in height, and left the deck of the shapely ship.
3157. There stood he on the watch, and with his spear he ever warded from the ship whosoever of the Trojans sought to bring unwearied fire; and ever with terrible cries he called to the Danaans: Friends, Danaan warriors, squires of Ares, be men, my friends, and bethink you of furious might.
3158. Do we haply deem that there are other helpers at our backs, or some stronger wall to ward off ruin from men?
3159. In no wise is there hard at hand a city fenced with walls, whereby we might defend ourselves, having a host to turn the tide of battle; nay, it is in the plain of the mail - clad Trojans that we are set, with naught to support us but the sea, and far from our native land.
3160. Therefore in the might of our hands is the light of deliverance, and not in slackness in fight.
3161. He spake, and kept driving furiously at the foe with his sharp spear.
3162. And whoso of the Trojans would rush upon the hollow ships with blazing fire, doing pleasure to Hector at his bidding, for him would Aias wait, and wound him with a thrust of his long spear; and twelve men did he wound in close fight in front of the ships.
3163. Thus then they were warring around the well - benched ship, but Patroclus drew nigh to Achilles, shepherd of the host, shedding hot tears, even as a fountain of dark water that down over the face of a beetling cliff poureth its dusky stream; and swift - footed goodly Achilles had pity when he saw him, and spake and addressed him with winged words:
3164. Why, Patroclus, art thou bathed in tears, like a girl, a mere babe, that runneth by her mother's side and biddeth her take her up, and clutcheth at her gown, and hindereth her in her going, and tearfully looketh up at her, till the mother take her up?
3165. Even like her, Patroclus, dost thou let fall round tears.
3166. Hast thou haply somewhat to declare to the Myrmidons or to mine own self, or is it some tidings out of Phthia that thyself alone hast heard?
3167. Still lives Menoetius, men tell us, Actor's son, and still lives Peleus.
3168. son of Aeacus, amid the Myrmidons, for which twain would we grieve right sore, were they dead.
3169. Or art thou sorrowing for the Argives, how they are being slain beside the hollow ships by reason of their own presumptuous act?
3170. Speak out; hide it not in thy mind; that we both may know.
3171. Then with a heavy groan, didst thou make answer, O knight Patroclus: O Achilles, son of Peleus, far the mightiest of the Achaeans, be not wroth; so great a sorrow hath overmastered the Achaeans.
3172. For verily all they that aforetime were bravest, lie among the ships smitten by darts or wounded with spear-thrusts.
3173. Smitten is the son of Tydeus, mighty Diomedes, wounded with spear-thrust is Odysseus, famed for his spear, and Agamemnon, and smitten, too, is Eurypylus with an arrow in the thigh.
3174. About these the leeches, skilled in many simples, are busied, seeking to heal their wounds; but with thee may no man deal, Achilles.
3175. Never upon me let such wrath lay hold, as that thou dost cherish, O thou whose valour is but a bane !
3176. Wherein shall any other even yet to be born have profit of thee, if thou ward not off shameful ruin from the Argives?
3177. Pitiless one, thy father, meseems, was not the knight Peleus, nor was Thetis thy mother, but the grey sea bare thee, and the beetling cliffs, for that thy heart is unbending.
3178. But if in thy mind thou art shunning some oracle, and thy queenly mother hath declared to thee aught from Zeus, yet me at least send thou forth speedily, and with me let the rest of the host of the Myrmidons follow, if so be I may prove a light of deliverance to the Danaans.
3179. And grant me to buckle upon my shoulders that armour of thine, in hope that the Trojans may take me for thee, and so desist from war, and the warlike sons of the Achaeans may take breath, wearied as they are; for scant is the breathing - space in battle.
3180. And lightly might we that are unwearied drive men that are wearied with the battle back to the city from the ships and the huts.
3181. So spake he in prayer, fool that he was, for in sooth it was to be his own evil death and fate for which he prayed.
3182. Then, his heart deeply stirred, spake to him swift - footed Achilles:
3183. Ah me, Zeus -born Patroclus, what a thing hast thou said !
3184. Neither reck I of any oracle, that I wot of, nor has my queenly mother declared to me aught from Zeus; but herein dread grief cometh upon heart and soul, whenso a man is minded to rob one that is his equal, and take from him his prize, for that he surpasseth him in power.
3185. Dread grief is this to me, seeing I have suffered woes at heart.
3186. The girl that the sons of the Achaeans chose out for me as a prize, and that I won with my spear, when I had laid waste a well - walled city, her hath lord Agamemnon taken back from my arms, this son of Atreus, as though I were some alien that had no rights.
3187. Howbeit these things will we let be, as past and done.
3188. In no wise, meseems, was I to be filled with ceaseless wrath at heart; yet verily I deemed that I should not make an end of mine anger, until the hour when unto mine own ships should come the war-cry and the battle.
3189. But come, do thou put upon thy shoulders my glorious armour, and lead forth the war-loving Myrmidons to the fight, if in good sooth the dark cloud of the Trojans lieth encompassed the ships mightily, and those others abide with naught to support them but the shore of the sea, having but scant space of land still left them, even the Argives; while the whole city of the Trojans hath come forth against them fearlessly, for they see not the front of my helm shining hard at hand; full soon in their flight would they fill the water - courses with their dead, were but lord Agamemnon of kindly mind toward me, whereas now they are warring around the camp.
3190. For not in the hands of Diomedes, son of Tydeus, doth the spear rage, to ward off ruin from the Danaans, neither as yet have I heard the voice of the son of Atreus, shouting from his hated head; nay, it is the voice of man-slaying Hector that breaketh about me, as he calleth to the Trojans, and they with their din possess all the plain, and vanquish the Achaeans in battle.
3191. Yet even so, Patroclus, in warding destruction from the ships fall thou upon them mightily, lest verily they burn the ships with blazing fire and rob the Greeks of their desired return.
3192. Howbeit do thou hearken, that I may put in thy mind the sum of my counsel, to the end that thou mayest win me great recompense and glory at the hands of all the Danaans, and that they send back that beauteous girl, and therewithal give glorious gifts.
3193. When thou hast driven them from the ships, come back, and if the loud - thundering lord of Hera grant thee to win glory, be not thou fain apart from me to war against the war-loving Trojans: thou wilt lessen mine honour.
3194. Nor yet do thou, as thou exultest in war and conflict, and slayest the Trojans, lead on unto Ilios, lest one of the gods that are for ever shall come down from Olympus and enter the fray; right dearly doth Apollo, that worketh afar, love them.
3195. Nay, return thou back, when once thou hast set a light of deliverance amid the ships, and suffer the rest to battle over the plain.
3196. For I would, O father Zeus, and Athene, and Apollo, that no man of the Trojans might escape death, of all that there are, neither any of the Argives, but that we twain might escape destruction, that alone we might loose the sacred diadem of Troy.
3197. On this wise spake they one to the other, but Aias no longer abode, for he was sore beset with darts; the will of Zeus was overmastering him, and the lordly Trojans with their missiles; and terribly did the bright helm about his temples ring continually, as it was smitten, for smitten it ever was upon the well - wrought cheek - pieces, and his left shoulder grew weary as he ever firmly held his flashing shield; nor might they beat it back about him, for all they pressed him hard with darts.
3198. And evermore was he distressed by laboured breathing, and down from his limbs on every side abundant sweat kept streaming, nor had he any wise respite to get his breath withal, but every way evil was heaped upon evil.
3199. Tell me now, ye Muses, that have dwellings on Olympus, how fire was first flung upon the ships of the Achaeans.
3200. It was Hector that drew nigh to Aias and smote his ashen spear with his great sword hard by the socket, at the base ot the point, and shore it clean away, so that Telamonian Aias brandished all vainly a pointless spear, and far from him the head of bronze fell ringing to the ground.
3201. And Aias knew in his noble heart, and shuddered at the deeds of the gods, how that Zeus, who thundereth on high, brought utterly to naught the counsels of his battle, and would have victory for the Trojans.
3202. Then he gave ground from out the darts; and the Trojans cast upon the swift ship unwearied fire, and over her forthwith streamed a flame that might not be quenched.
3203. So then was the ship's stern wreathed about with fire, but Achilles smote both his thighs and spake to Patroclus:
3204. Up now, Zeus -born Patroclus, master of horsemen.
3205. Lo, I see by the ships the rush of consuming fire.
3206. Let it not be that they take the ships and there be no more escaping !
3207. Do on my armour with all haste, and I will gather the host.
3208. So spake he, and Patroclus arrayed him in gleaming bronze.
3209. The greaves first he set about his legs; beautiful they were, and fitted with silver ankle-pieces; next he did on about his chest the corselet of the swift - footed son of Aeacus, richly - wrought, and spangled with stars.
3210. And about his shoulders he cast the silver - studded sword of bronze, and thereafter the shield, great and sturdy; and upon his mighty head he set the well - wrought helmet with horse - hair crest, and terribly did the plume nod from above; and he took two valorous spears, that fitted his grasp.
3211. Only the spear of the peerless son of Aeacus he took not, the spear heavy and huge and strong; this none other of the Achaeans could wield, but Achilles alone was skilled to wield it, even the Pelian spear of ash, that Cheiron had given to his dear father from the peak of Pelion, to be for the slaying of warriors.
3212. And the horses he bade Automedon yoke speedily, even him that he honoured most after Achilles, breaker of the ranks of men, and that in his eyes was faithful above all to abide his call in battle.
3213. At his bidding then Automedon led beneath the yoke the fleet horses, Xanthus and Balius, that flew swift as the winds, horses that the Harpy Podarge conceived to the West Wind, as she grazed on the meadow beside the stream of Oceanus.
3214. And in the side - traces he set the goodly Pedasus that on a time Achilles had brought away, when he took the city of Eetion; and he, being but mortal, kept pace with immortal steeds.
3215. But Achilles went to and fro throughout the huts and let harness in their armour all the Myrmidons, and they rushed forth like ravening wolves in whose hearts is fury unspeakable — wolves that have slain in the hills a great horned stag, and rend him, and the jaws of all are red with gore; and in a pack they go to lap with their slender tongues the surface of the black water from a dusky spring, belching forth the while blood and gore, the heart in their breasts unflinching, and their bellies gorged full; even in such wise the leaders and rulers of the Myrmidons sped forth round about the valiant squire of the swift - footed son of Aeacus.
3216. And among them all stood warlike Achilles, urging on both horses and men that bear the shield.
3217. Fifty were the swift ships which Achilles, dear to Zeus, led to Troy, and in each ship at the thole - pins were fifty men, his comrades; and five leaders had he appointed in whom he trusted to give command, and himself in his great might was king over all.
3218. The one rank was led by Menesthius of the flashing corselet, son of Spercheius, the heaven - fed river.
3219. Him did fair Polydora, daughter of Peleus, bear to tireless Spercheius, a woman couched with a god, but in name she bare him to Borus, son of Perieres, who openly wedded her, when he had given gifts of wooing past counting.
3220. And of the next company warlike Eudorus was captain, the son of a girl unwed, and him did Polymele, fair in the dance, daughter of Phylas, bear.
3221. Of her the strong Argeiphontes became enamoured, when his eyes had sight of her amid the singing maidens, in the dancing - floor of Artemis, huntress of the golden arrows and the echoing chase.
3222. Forthwith then he went up into her upper chamber, and lay with her secretly, even Hermes the helper, and she gave him a goodly son, Eudorus, pre-eminent in speed of foot and as a warrior.
3223. But when at length Eileithyia, goddess of child - birth, had brought him to the light, and he saw the rays of the sun, then her did the stalwart and mighty Echecles, son of Actor, lead to his home, when he had given countless gifts of wooing, and Eudorus did old Phylas nurse and cherish tenderly, loving him dearly, as he had been his own son.
3224. And of the third company warlike Peisander was captain, son of Maemalus, a man pre-eminent among all the Myrmidons in fighting with the spear, after the comrade of the son of Peleus.
3225. And the fourth company did the old knight Phoenix lead, and the fifth Alcimedon, the peerless son of Laerces.
3226. But when at length Achilles had set them all in array with their leaders, duly parting company from company, he laid upon them a stern command: Myrmidons, let no man, I bid you, be forgetful of the threats, wherewith heside the swift ships ye threatened the Trojans throughout all the time of my wrath, and upbraided me, each man of you, saying:
3227. Cruel son of Peleus, surely it was on gall that thy mother reared thee, thou pitiless one, seeing that in their own despite thou holdest back thy comrades beside the ships.
3228. With such words would ye ofttimes gather together and prate at me, but now is set before you a great work of war, whereof in time past ye were enamoured.
3229. Therefore let it be with valiant heart that each man fights with the Trojans.
3230. So saying, he aroused the strength and spirit of every man, and yet closer were their ranks serried when they heard their king.
3231. And as when a man buildeth the wall of a high house with close - set stones, to avoid the might of the winds, even so close were arrayed their helms and bossed shields; buckler pressed on buckler, helm upon helm, and man on man.
3232. The horse - hair crests on the bright helmet - ridges touched each other, as the men moved their heads, in such close array stood they one by another.
3233. And in the front of all two warriors arrayed themselves for war, even Patroclus and Automedon, both of one mind, to war in the forefront of the Myrmidons.
3234. But Achilles went into his hut, and opened the lid of a chest, fair and richly - dight, that silver - footed Thetis had set on his ship for him to carry with him, whem she had filled it well with tunics, and cloaks to keep off the wind, and woollen rugs.
3235. Therein had he a fair - fashioned cup, wherefrom neither was any other man wont to drink the flaming wine, nor was he wont to pour drink offerings to any other of the gods save only to father Zeus.
3236. This cup he then took from the chest and cleansed it first with sulphur, and thereafter washed it in fair streams of water; and himself he washed his hands, and drew flaming wine.
3237. Then he made prayer, standing in the midst of the court, and poured forth the wine, looking up to heaven; and not unmarked was he of Zeus, that hurleth the thunderbolt: Zeus, thou king, Dodonaean, Pelasgian, thou that dwellest afar, ruling over wintry Dodona, — and about thee dwell the Selli, thine interpreters, men with unwashen feet that couch on the ground.
3238. Aforetime verily thou didst hear my word, when I prayed: me thou didst honour, and didst mightily smite the host of the Achaeans; even so now also fulfill thou for me this my desire.
3239. Myself verily will I abide in the gathering of the ships, but my comrade am I sending forth amid the host of the Myrmidons to war: with him do thou send forth glory, O Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, and make bold the heart in his breast, to the end that Hector, too, may know whether even alone my squire hath skill to fight, or whether his hands then only rage invincible, whenso I enter the turmoil of Ares.
3240. But when away from the ships he hath driven war and the din of war, thea all - unscathed let him come back to the swift ships with all his arms, and his comrades that fight in close combat.
3241. So spake he in prayer, and Zeus, the counsellor, heard him, and a part the Father granted him, and a part denied.
3242. That Patroclus should thrust back the war and battle from the ships he granted; but that he should return safe from out the battle he denied.
3243. Achilles then, when he had poured libation and made prayer to father Zeus, went again into his tent, and laid the cup away in the chest, and came forth and stood in front of the hut; for still his heart was fain to look upon the dread conflict of Trojans and Achaeans.
3244. But they that were arrayed together with great-hearted Patroclus marched forth, until with high spirits they leapt upon the Trojans.
3245. Straightway they poured forth like wasps of the wayside, that boys are wont to stir to wrath, ever tormenting them in their nests beside the way, foolish that they are; and a common evil they make for many.
3246. And the wasps, if so be some wayfaring ran as he passeth by rouse them unwittingly, fly forth one and all in the valour of their hearts, and fight each in defence of his young; having a heart and spirit like theirs the Myrmidons then poured forth from the ships, and a cry unquenchable arose.
3247. But Patroclus called to his comrades with a loud shout: Myrmidons, ye comrades of Achilles, son of Peleus, be men, my friends, and bethink you of furious valour, to the end that we may win honour for the son of Peleus, that is far the best of the Argives by the ships, himself and his squires that fight in close combat; and that the son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon, may know his blindness in that he honoured not at all the best of the Achaeans.
3248. So saying, he roused the strength and spirit of every man, and on the Trojans they fell all in a throng, and round about them the ships echoed wondrously beneath the shouting of the Achaeans.
3249. But when the Trojans saw the valiant son of Menoetius, himself and his squire, shining in their armour, the heart of each man was stirred, and their battalions were shaken, for they deemed that by the ships the swift - footed son of Peleus had cast aside his wrath and had chosen friendliness; and each man gazed about to see how he might escape utter destruction.
3250. Then Patroclus was first to cast with his bright spear straight into the midst where men thronged the thickest, even by the stern of the ship of great-souled Protesilaus, and smote Pyraechmes, that had led the Paeonians, lords of chariots, out of Amydon, from the wide - flowing Axius.
3251. Him he smote on the right shoulder, and backward in the dust he fell with a groan, and about him his comrades were driven in rout, even the Paeonians, for upon them all had Patroclus sent panic, when he slew their leader that was pre-eminent in fight.
3252. From out the ships then he drave them, and quenched the blazing fire.
3253. And half - burnt the ship was left there, but the Trojans were driven in rout with a wondrous din, and the Danaans poured in among the hollow ships, and a ceaseless din arose.
3254. And as when from the high crest of a great mountain Zeus, that gathereth the lightnings, moveth a dense cloud away, and forth to view appear all mountain peaks, and high headlands, and glades, and from heaven breaketh open the infinite air; even so the Danaans, when they had thrust back from the ships consuming fire, had respite for a little time; howbeit there was no ceasing from war.
3255. For not yet were the Trojans driven in headlong rout by the Achaeans, dear to Ares, from the black ships, but still they sought to withstand them, and gave ground from the ships perforce.
3256. Then man slew man of the chieftains as the fight was scattered.
3257. First the valiant son of Menoetius smote the thigh of Areilycus with a cast of his sharp spear at the moment when he turned to flee, and drave the bronze clean through; and the spear brake the bone, and he fell on his face on the ground.
3258. And warlike Menelaus thrust and smote Thoas on the breast, where it was left bare beside the shield, and loosed his limbs.
3259. And the son of Phyleus as he watched Amphiclus that was rushing upon him, proved quicker than his foe, and smote him upon the base of the leg, where a man's muscle is thickest; and round about the spear-point the sinews were rent apart; and darkness enfolded his eyes.
3260. Then of the sons of Nestor, the one, Antilochus, thrust at Atymnius with his sharp spear, and drave the spear of bronze through his flank; and he fell forward.
3261. But Maris, hard at hand, rushed upon Antilochus with his spear, wroth for his brother's sake, and took his stand before the dead; howbeit godlike Thrasymedes was too quick for him, and forthwith ere his foe could thrust, smote upon his shoulder, and missed not; but the point of the spear shore the base of the arm away from the muscles, and utterly brake asunder the bone; and he fell with a thud, and darkness enfolded his eyes.
3262. So these twain, overcome by twain brethren, went their way to Erebus, goodly comrades of Sarpedon, spearmen sons of Araisodarus, him that reared the raging Chimaera, a bane to many men.
3263. And Aias, son of Oileus, leapt upon Cleobulus, and caught him alive, entangled in the throng; but even there he loosed his might, smiting him upon the neck with his hilted sword.
3264. Thereat all the blade grew warm with his blood, and down over his eyes came dark death and mighty fate.
3265. Then Peneleos and Lyco rushed together, for with their spears either had missed the other, and both had cast in vain; but again they rushed together with their swords.
3266. Then Lyco let drive upon the horn of the helm with horse - hair crest, and the sword was shattered at the hilt; but Peneleos smote him upon the neck beneath the ear, and all the blade sank in, so that naught but the skin held fast, and the head hung to one side, and his limbs were loosed.
3267. And Meriones with swift strides overtook Acamas, and thrust and smote him, even as he was mounting his car, upon the right shoulder; and he fell from his car and down over his eyes a mist was shed.
3268. Then Idomeneus smote Erymas upon the mouth with a thrust of the pitiless bronze, and clean through passed the spear of bronze beneath the brain, and clave asunder the white bones; and his teeth were shaken out, and both his eyes were filled with blood; and up through mouth and nostrils he spurted blood as he gaped, and a black cloud of death enfolded him.
3269. These, then, leaders of the Damans, slew each his man.
3270. And as murderous wolves fall upon lambs or kids, choosing them from out the flocks, when through the witlessness of the shepherd they are scattered among the mountains, and the wolves seeing it, forthwith harry the young whose hearts know naught of valour; even so the Damans fell upon the Trojans, and they bethougnt them of ill-sounding flight, and forgat their furious valour.
3271. And the great Aias was ever fain to cast his spear at Hector, harnessed in bronze, but he in his cunning of war, his broad shoulders covered with shield of bull's-hide, ever watched the whirring of arrows and the hurtling of spears.
3272. In sooth he knew the tide of victory was turning, but even so he abode, and sought to save his trustv comrades.
3273. And as when from Olympus a cloud fareth toward heaven out of the bright air, when Zeus spreadeth forth the tempest, even so from the ships came the shouting and the rout of these; nor was it in good order that they crossed the trench again.
3274. Hector verily did his swift - footed horses bear forth with his battle - gear, and he left tbe hosts of Troy, whom the digged trench held back against their will.
3275. And in the trench many pairs of swift horses, drawers of chariots, brake the pole at the end, and left the chariots of their lords.
3276. But Patroclus followed after, calling fiercely to the Danaans, with purpose of evil toward the Trojans, while they with shouting and in flight filled all the ways, now that their ranks were broken; and on high a cloud of dust was spread up beneath the clouds, and the single - hoofed horses strained back toward the city from the ships and the huts.
3277. And Patroclus, wheresoever he saw the greatest throng huddled in rout, thither would with shouting; and beneath his axle-trees men kept falling headlong from their cars, and the chariots were overturned.
3278. And straight over the trench leapt the swift horses — the immortal horses that the gods gave as glorious gifts to Peleus — in their onward flight, and against Hector did the heart of Patroclus urge him on, for he was fain to smite him; but his swift horses ever bare Hector forth.
3279. And even as beneath a tempest the whole black earth is oppressed, on a day in harvest-time, when Zeus poureth forth rain most violently, whenso in anger he waxeth wroth against men that by violence give crooked judgments in the place of gathering, and drive justice out, recking not of the vengeance of the gods; and all their rivers flow in flood, and many a hillside do the torrents furrow deeply, and down to the dark sea they rush headlong from the mountains with a mighty roar, and the tilled fields of men are wasted; even so mighty was the roar of the mares of Troy as they sped on.
3280. But when Patroclus had cut off the foremost battalions, he hemmed them back again towards the ships and would not suffer them for all their eagerness to set foot in the city, but in the mid-space between the ships and the river and the high wall he rushed among them and slew them, and got him vengeance for many a slain comrade.
3281. There verily he first smote Pronous with a cast of his bright spear, upon the breast where it was left bare beside the shield, and loosed his limbs; and he feIl with a thud.
3282. Next upon Thestor, son of Enops, he rushed.
3283. Crouching he sat in his polished car, for his wits were distraught with terror, and the reins had slipped from his hands, but Patroclus drew nigh to him, and smote him upon the right jaw with his spear, and drave it through his teeth; and he laid hold of the spear and dragged him over the chariot-rim, as when a man sitting upon a jutting rock draggeth to land a sacred fish from out the sea, with line and gleaming hook of bronze; even so on the bright spear dragged he him agape from out the car, and cast him down upon his face; and life left him as he fell.
3284. Then as Erylaus rushed upon him, he smote him full upon the head with a stone, and his head was wholly cloven asunder within the heavy helmet; and he fell headlong upon the earth, and death, that slayeth the spirit, was shed about him.
3285. Thereafter Erymas and Amphoterus, and Epaltes, and Tlepolemus, son of Damastor, and Echius and Pyris, and Ipheus and Evippus, and Polymelus, son of Argeas, all these one after another he brought down to the bounteous earth.
3286. But when Sarpedon saw his comrades, that wear the tunic ungirt, being laid low beneath the hands of Patroclus, son of Menoetius, he called aloud, upbraiding the godlike Lycians: Shame, ye Lycians, whither do ye flee?
3287. Now be ye swift to fight; for I myself will meet this man, that I may know who he is that prevaileth here, and verily hath wrought the Trojans much mischief, seeing he hath loosed the knees of many men and goodly.
3288. He spake, and leapt in his armour from his chariot to the ground.
3289. And Patroclus, over against him, when he beheld him, sprang from his chariot.
3290. And as vultures crooked of talon and curved of beak fight with loud cries upom a high rock, even so with cries rushed they one against the other.
3291. And the son of crooked - counselling Cronos took pity when he saw them, and spake to Hera, his sister and his wife:
3292. Ah, woe is me, for that it is fated that Sarpedon, dearest of men to me, be slain by Patroclus, son of Menoetius !
3293. And in twofold wise is my heart divided in counsel as I ponder in my thought whether I shall snatch him up while yet he liveth and set him afar from the tearful war in the rich land of Lycia, or whether I shall slay him now beneath the hands of the son of Menoetius.
3294. Then ox -eyed queenly Hera answered him: Most dread son of Cronos, what a word hast thou said !
3295. A man that is mortal, doomed long since by fate, art thou minded to deliver again from dolorous death?
3296. Do as thou wilt; but be sure that we other gods assent not all thereto.
3297. And another thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to heart: if thou send Sarpedon living to his house, bethink thee lest hereafter some other god also be minded to send his own dear son away from the fierce conflict; for many there be fighting around the great city of Priam that are sons of the immortals, and among the gods wilt thou send dread wrath.
3298. But and if he be dear to thee, and thine heart be grieved, suffer thou him verily to be slain in the fierce conflict beneath the hands of Patroclus, son of Menoetius; but when his soul and life have left him, then send thou Death and sweet Sleep to bear him away until they come to the land of wide Lycia; and there shall his brethren and his kinsfolk give him burial with mound and pillar; for this is the due of the dead.
3299. So spake she, and the father of men and gods failed to hearken.
3300. Howbeit he shed bloody rain - drops on the earth, shewing honour to his dear son —his own son whom Patroclus was about to slay in the deep- soiled land of Troy, far from his native land.
3301. Now when they were come near, as they advanced one against the other, then verily did Patroclus smite glorious Thrasymelus, that was the valiant squire of the prince Sarpedon; him he smote on the lower belly, and loosed his limbs.
3302. But Sarpedon missed him with his bright spear, as in turn he got upon him, but smote with his spear the horse Pedasus on the right shoulder; and the horse shrieked aloud as he gasped forth his life, and down he fell in the dust with a moan, and his spirit flew from him.
3303. But the other twain reared this way and that, and the yoke creaked, and above them the reins were entangled, when the trace - horse lay low in the dust.
3304. Howbeit for this did Automedon, famed for his spear, find him a remedy; drawing his long sword from beside his stout thigh, he sprang forth and cut loose the trace - horse, and faltered not, and the other two were righted, and strained at the reins; and the two warriors came together again in soul-devouring strife.
3305. Then again Sarpedon missed with his bright spear, and over the left shoulder of Patroclus went the point of the spear and smote him not.
3306. But Patroclus in turn rushed on with the bronze, and not in vain did the shaft speed from his hand, but smote his foe where the midriff is set close about the throbbing heart.
3307. And he fell as an oak falls, or a poplar, or a tall pine, that among the mountains shipwrights fell with whetted axes to be a ship's timber; even so before his horses and chariot he lay outstretched, moaning aloud and clutching at the bloody dust.
3308. And as a lion cometh into the midst of a herd and slayeth a bull, tawny and high of heart amid the kine of trailing gait, and with a groan he perisheth beneath the jaws of the lion; even so beneath Patroclus did the leader of the Lycian shieldmen struggle in death; and he called by name his dear comrade: Dear Glaucus, warrior amid men of war, now in good sooth it behoveth thee to quit thee as a spearman and a dauntless warrior; now be evil war thy heart's desire if indeed thou art swift to fight.
3309. First fare thou up and down everywhere, and urge on the leaders of the Lycians to fight for Sarpedon, and thereafter thyself do battle with the bronze in my defence.
3310. For to thee even in time to come shall I be a reproach and a hanging of the head, all thy days continually, if so be the Achaeans shall spoil me of my armour, now that I am fallen amid the gathering of the ships.
3311. Nay, hold thy ground valiantly, and urge on all the host.
3312. Even as he thus spake the end of death enfolded him, his eyes alike and his nostrils; and Patroclus, setting his foot upon his breast, drew the spear from out the flesh, and the midriff followed therewith; and at the one moment he drew forth the spear-point and the soul of Sarpedon.
3313. And the Myrmidons stayed there the snorting horses, that were fain to flee now that they had left the chariot of their lords.
3314. But upon Glaucus came dread grief as he heard the voice of Sarpedon, and his heart was stirred, for that he availed not to succour him.
3315. And with his hand he caught and pressed his arm, for his wound tormented him, the wound that Teucer, while warding off destruction from his comrades, had dealt him with his arrow as he rushed upon the high wall.
3316. Then in prayer he spake to Apollo, that smiteth afar: Hear me, O king that art haply in the rich land of Lycia or haply in Troy, but everywhere hast power to hearken unto a man that is in sorrow, even as now sorrow is come upon me.
3317. For I have this grievous wound and mine arm on this side and on that is shot through with sharp pangs, nor can the blood be staunched; and my shoulder is made heavy with the wound, and I avail not to grasp my spear firmly, neither to go and fight with the foe-men.
3318. And a man far the noblest hath perished, even Sarpedon, the son of Zeus; and he succoureth not his own child.
3319. Howbeit, do thou, O king, heal me of this grievous wound, and lull my pains, and give me might, that I may call to my comrades, the Lycians, and urge them on to fight, and myself do battle about the body of him that is fallen in death.
3320. So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him.
3321. Forthwith he made his pains to cease, and staunched the black blood that flowed from his grievous wound, and put might into his heart.
3322. And Glaucus knew in his mind, and was glad that the great god had quickly heard his prayer.
3323. First fared he up and down everywhere and urged on the leaders of the Lycians to fight for Sarpedon, and thereafter went with long strides into the midst of the Trojans, unto Polydamas, son of Panthous, and goodly Agenor, and he went after Aeneas, and after Hector, harnessed in bronze.
3324. And he came up to him and spake winged words, saying:
3325. Hector, now in good sooth art thou utterly forgetful of the allies, that for thy sake far from their friends and their native land are wasting their lives away, yet thou carest not to aid them.
3326. Low lies Sarpedon, leader of the Lycian shieldmen, he that guarded Lycia by his judgments and his might.
3327. Him hath brazen Ares laid low beneath the spear of Patroclus.
3328. Nay, friends, take your stand beside him, and have indignation in heart, lest the Myrmidons strip him of his armour and work shame upon his corpse, being wroth for the sake of all the Danaans that have perished, whom we slew with our spears at the swift ships.
3329. So spake he, and the Trojans were utterly seized with grief, unbearable, overpowering; for Sarpedon was ever the stay of their city, albeit he was a stranger from afar; for much people followed with him, and among them he was himself pre-eminent in fight.
3330. And they made straight for the Danaans full eagerly, and Hector led them, in wrath for Sarpedon's sake.
3331. But the Achaeans were urged on by Patroclus, of the shaggy heart, son of Menoetius.
3332. To the twain Aiantes spake he first, that were of themselves full eager:
3333. Ye twain Aiantes, now be it your will to ward off the foe, being of such valour as of old ye were amid warriors, or even braver.
3334. Low lies the man that was first to leap within the wall of the Achaeans, even Sarpedon.
3335. Nay, let us seek to take him, and work shame upon his body, and strip the armour from his shoulders, and many a one of his comrades that seek to defend his body let us slay with the pitiless bronze.
3336. So spake he, and they even of themselves were eager to ward off the foe.
3337. Then when on both sides they had made strong their battalions, the Trojans and Lycians, and the Myrmidons and Achaeans, they joined battle to fight for the body of him that was fallen in death, with terrible shouting; and loud rang the harness of men.
3338. And Zeus drew baneful night over the mighty conflict, that around his dear son might be waged the baneful toil of war.
3339. And first the Trojans drave back the bright -eyed Achaeans, for smitten was a man in no wise the worst among the Myrmidons, even the son of great-souled Agacles, goodly Epeigeus, that was king in well - peopled Budeum of old, but when he had slain a goodly man of his kin, to Peleus he came as a suppliant, and to silver - footed Thetis; and they sent him to follow with Achilles, breaker of the ranks of men, to Ilios, famed for its horses, that he might fight with the Trojans.
3340. Him, as he was laying hold of the corpse, glorious Hector smote upon the head with a stone; and his head was wholly cloven asunder within the heavy helmet, and he fell headlong upon the corpse, and death, that slayeth the spirit, was shed about him.
3341. Then over Patroclus came grief for his slain comrade, and he charged through the foremost fighters like a fleet falcon that driveth in flight daws and starlings; even so straight against the Lycians, O Patroclus, master of horsemen, and against the Trojans didst thou charge, and thy heart was full of wrath for thy comrade.
3342. And he smote Sthenelaus, the dear son of Ithaemenes, on the neck with a stone, and brake away therefrom the sinews; and the foremost fighters and glorious Hector gave ground.
3343. Far as is the flight of a long javelin, that a man casteth, making trial of his strength, in a contest, haply, or in war beneath the press of murderous foemen, even so far did the Trojans draw back, and the Achaeans drave them.
3344. And Glaucus first, the leader of the Lycian shieldmen, turned him about, and slew great- souled Bathycles, the dear son of Chalcon, him that had his abode in Hellas, and for wealth and substance was pre-eminent among the Myrmidons.
3345. Him did Glaucus smite full upon the breast with a thrust of his spear, turning suddenly upon rum, when the other was about to overtake him in pursuit.
3346. And he fell with a thud, and sore grief gat hold of the Achaeans, for that a good man was fallen; but mightily did the Trojans rejoice.
3347. And they came in throngs and took their stand about him, nor did the Achaeans forget their valour, but bare their might straight toward the foe.
3348. Then Meriones slew a warrior of the Trojans, in full armour, Laogonus, the bold son of Onetor, one that was priest of Idaean Zeus, and was honoured of the folk even as a god: him he smote beneath the jaw under the ear, and forthwith his spirit departed from his limbs, and hateful darkness gat hold of hinu.
3349. And Aeneas cast at Meriones his spear of bronze, for he hoped to smite him as he advanced under cover of his shield.
3350. But Meriones, looking steadily at him, avoided the spear of bronze; for he stooped forward, and the long spear fixed itself in the ground behind him, and the butt of the spear quivered; howbeit there at length did mighty
3351. Ares stay its fury.
3352. [ And the lance of Aeneas sank quivering down into the earth, for that it sped in vain from his mighty hand. ]
3353. Then Aeneas waxed wroth at heart, and spake, saying: Meriones, full soon, for all thou art a nimble dancer, would my spear have made thee to cease dancing for ever, had I but struck thee.
3354. And Meriones, famed for his spear, made answer: Aeneas, hard were it for thee, valiant though thou art, to quench the might of every man, whosoever cometh against thee to rake defence.
3355. Of mortal stuff, I ween, art thou as well.
3356. If so be I should cast, and smite thee fairly with my sharp spear, quickly then, for all thou art strong and trustest in thy hands, shouldst thou yield glory to me, and thy soul to Hades of the goodly steeds.
3357. So spake he, but the valiant son of Menoetius rebuked him, saying: Meriones, wherefore dost thou, that art a man of valour, speak on this wise?
3358. Good friend, it is not for words of reviling that the Trojans will give ground from the corpse; ere that shall the earth hold many a one.
3359. For in our hands is the issue of war; that of words is in the council.
3360. Wherefore it beseemeth not in any wise to multiply words, but to fight.
3361. So saying, he led the way, and the other followed, a godlike man.
3362. And from them —even as the din ariseth of woodcutters in the glades of a mountain, and afar is the sound thereof heard — so from them went up a clanging from the broad - wayed earth, a clanging of bronze and of hide and of well - wrought shields, as they thrust one at the other with swords and two -edged spears.
3363. Nor could a man, though he knew him well, any more have discerned goodly Sarpedon, for that he was utterly enwrapped with darts and blood and dust, from his head to the very soles of his feet.
3364. And they ever thronged about the corpse as when in a farmstead flies buzz about the full milk - pails, in the season of spring, when the milk drenches the vessels; even so thronged they about the corpse.
3365. Nor did Zeus anywise turn his bright eyes from the fierce conflict, but ever looked down upon them, and debated in heart, pondering much about the slaying of Patroclus, whether in the fierce conflict even there over godlike Sarpedon, glorious Hector should slay him likewise with the sword, and should strip the armour from his shoulders, or whether for yet more men he should make the utter toil of war to wax.
3366. And as he pondered, this thing seemed to him the better, that the valiant squire of Achilles, Peleus' son, should again drive toward the city the Trojans and Hector, harnessed in bronze, and take the lives of many.
3367. In Hector first of all he roused cowardly rout, and he leapt upon his car and turned to flight, and called on the rest of the Trojans to flee; for he knew the turning of the sacred scales of Zeus.
3368. Then the valiant Lycians likewise abode not, but were driven in rout one and all, when they saw their king smitten to the heart, lying in the gathering of the dead; for many had fallen above him, when the son of Cronos strained taut the cords of the fierce conflict.
3369. But from the shoulders of Sarpedon they stripped his shining harness of bronze, and this the valiant son of Menoetius gave to his comrades to bear to the hollow ships.
3370. And then unto Apollo spake Zeus, the cloud - gatherer:
3371. Up now, dear Phoebus, go cleanse from Sarpedon the dark blood, when thou hast taken him forth from out the range of darts, and thereafter bear thou him far away, and bathe him in the streams of the river, and anoint him with ambrosia, and clothe him about with immortal raiment, and give him to swift conveyers to bear with them, even to the twin brethren, Sleep and Death, who shall set him speedily in the rich land of wide Lycia.
3372. There shall his brethren and his kinsfolk give him burial with mound and pillar; for this is the due of tne dead.
3373. So spake he, nor was Apollo disobedient to his father's bidding, but went down from the hills of Ida into the dread din of battle.
3374. Forthwith then he lifted up goodly Sarpedon forth from out the range of darts, and when he had borne him far away, bathed him in the streams of the river, and anointed him with ambrosia, and clothed him about with immortal raiment, and gave him to swift conveyers to bear with them, even to the twin brethren, Sleep and Death, who set him speedily in the rich land of wide Lycia.
3375. But Patroclus with a call to his horses and to Automedon, pressed after the Trojans and Lycians, and was greatly blinded in heart, fool that he was !
3376. for had he observed the word of the son of Peleus, he would verily have escaped the evil fate of black death.
3377. But ever is the intent of Zeus stronger than that of men, for he driveth even a valiant man in rout, and robbeth him of victory full easily, and again of himself he rouseth men to fight; and he it was that now put fury in the breast of Patroclus.
3378. Then whom first, whom last didst thou slay, Patroclus, when the gods called thee deathward?
3379. Adrastus first, and Autonous, and Echeclus, and Perimus, son of Megas, and Epistor, and Melanippus, and thereafter Elasus, and Mulius, and Pylartes: these he slew, and the others bethought them each man of flight.
3380. Then would the sons of the Achaeans have taken high - gated Troy by the hands of Patroclus, for around and before him he raged with his spear, had not Phoebus Apollo taken his stand upon the well - builded wall thinking thoughts of bane for him, but bearing aid to the Trojans.
3381. Thrice did Patroclus set foot upon a corner of the high wall, and thrice did Apollo fling him back, thrusting against the bright shield with his immortal hands.
3382. But when for the fourth time he rushed on like a god, then with a terrible cry Apollo spake to him winged words:
3383. Give back, Zeus -born Patroclus.
3384. It is not fated, I tell thee, that by thy spear the city of the lordly Trojans shall be laid waste, nay, nor by that of Achilles, who is better far than thou.
3385. So spake he, and Patroclus gave ground a great space backward, avoiding the wrath of Apollo that smiteth afar.
3386. But Hector at the Scaean gate was staying his single - hoofed horses, for he was divided in mind, whether he should drive again into the turmoil and do battle, or should call to the host to gather them within the wall.
3387. And while he pondered thus there drew nigh to him Phoebus Apollo in the likeness of a young man and a strong, even of Asius, that was uncle to horse - taming Hector, and own brother to Hecabe, but son of Dymas, that dwelt in Phrygia by the streams of Sangarius.
3388. In his likeness spake Apollo, the son of Zeus, unto Hector: Hector, wherefore dost thou cease from battle?
3389. It beseemeth thee not.
3390. I would that I were as much stronger than thou as I am weaker; then straightway would it be to thine own hurt that thou drawest back from the war.
3391. Nay, come, drive against Patroclus thy strong - hoofed horses, if so be thou mayest slay him, and Apollo give thee glory.
3392. So spake he, and went back again, a god into the toil of men.
3393. Then unto wise - hearted Cebriones glorious Hector gave command to lash his horses into the battle.
3394. But Apollo went his way, and entered into the throng, and sent an evil panic upon the Argives, and vouchsafed glory to the Trojans and to Hector.
3395. But Hector let be the other Danaans, neither sought to stay them, but drave his strong - hoofed horses against Patroclus; and Patroclus over against him leapt from his chariot to the ground with a spear in his left hand, while with the other he grasped a stone, shining and jagged, that his hand compassed about.
3396. Firmly he planted himself, and hurled it, neither had he long awe of his foe, nor sped he his missile in vain, but smote the charioteer of Hector, even Cebriones, a bastard son of glorious Priam, upon the forehead with the sharp stone, as he was holding the reins of the horses.
3397. And both his brows did the stone dash together, and the bone held not, but the eyes fell to the ground in the dust even there, before his feet.
3398. And like a diver he fell from the well - wrought car, and his spirit left his bones.
3399. Then with mocking words didst thou speak to him, knight Patroclus:
3400. Hah, look you, verily nimble is the man; how lightly he diveth !
3401. In sooth if he were on the teeming deep, this man would satisfy many by seeking for oysters, leaping from his ship were the sea never so stormy, seeing that now on the plain he diveth lightly from his car.
3402. Verily among the Trojans too there be men that dive.
3403. So saying he made for the warrior Cebriones with the rush of a lion that, while he wasteth the farm-stead, hath been smitten on the breast, and his own valour bringeth him to ruin; even so upon Cebriones, O Patroclus, didst thou leap furiously.
3404. And Hector over against him leapt from his chariot to the ground.
3405. So the twain joined in strife for Cebriones like two lions, that on the peaks of a mountain fight for a slain hind, both of them hungering, both high of heart; even so for Cebriones the two masters of the war-cry, even Patroclus, son of Menoetius, and glorious Hector, were fain each to cleave the other's flesh with the pitiless bronze.
3406. Hector, when once he had seized the corpse by the head, would not loose his hold, and Patroclus over against him held fast hold of the foot; and about them the others, Trojans and Danaans, joined in fierce conflict.
3407. And as the East Wind and the South strive with one another in shaking a deep wood in the glades of a mountain, — a wood of beech and ash and smooth - barked cornel, and these dash one against the other their long boughs with a wondrous din, and there is a crashing of broken branches; even so the Trojans and Achaeans leapt one upon another and made havoc, nor would either side take thought of ruinous flight.
3408. And round about Cebriones many sharp spears were fixed, and many winged arrows that leapt from the bow-string, and many great stones smote against shields, as men fought around him.
3409. But he in the whirl of dust lay mighty in his mightiness, forgetful of his horsemanship.
3410. Now as long as the sun bestrode mid-heaven, so long the missiles of either side reached their mark, and the folk kept falling; but when he turned to the time for the unyoking of oxen, then verily beyond their portion the Achaeans proved the better.
3411. Forth from out the range of darts they drew the warrior Cebriones from the battle - din of the Trojans, and stripped the armour from his shoulders; and Patroclus with fell intent leapt upon the Trojans.
3412. Thrice then leapt he upon them, the peer of swift Ares, crying a terrible cry, and thrice he slew nine men.
3413. But when for the fourth time he rushed on, like a god, then for thee, Patroclus, did the end of life appear; for Phoebus met thee in the fierce conflict, an awful god.
3414. And Patroclus marked him not as he passed through the turmuoil, for enfolded in thick mist did he meet him; and Apollo took his stand behind him, and smote his back and broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, and his eyes were made to whirl.
3415. And from his head Phoebus Apollo smote the helmet, that rang as it rolled beneath the feet of the horses — the crested helm; and the plumes were befouled with blood and dust.
3416. Not until that hour had the gods suffered that helm with plume of horse - hair to be befouled with dust, but ever did it guard the head and comely brow of a godlike man, even of Achilles; but then Zeus vouchsafed it to Hector, to wear upon his head, yet was destruction near at hand for him.
3417. And in the hands of Patroclus the far-shadowing spear was wholly broken, the spear, heavy, and huge, and strong, and tipped with bronze; and from his shoulders the tasselled shield with its baldric fell to the ground, and his corselet did Apollo loose — the prince, the son of Zeus.
3418. Then blindness seized his mind, and his glorious limbs were loosed beneath him, and he stood in a daze; and from behind him from close at hand a Dardanian smote him upon the back between the shoulders with a cast of his sharp spear, even Panthous' son, Euphorbus, that excelled all men of his years in casting the spear, and in horsemanship, and in speed of foot; and lo, twenty warriors had he already cast from their cars at his first coming with his chariot to learn his lesson of war.
3419. He it was that first hurled his spear at thee, knight Patroclus, yet subdued thee not; but he ran back again and mingled with the throng, when he had drawn forth the ashen spear from the flesh, and he abode not Patroclus, unarmed though he was, in the fray.
3420. But Patroclus, overcome by the stroke of the god and by the spear, drew back into the throng of his comrades, avoiding fate.
3421. But Hector, when he beheld great-souled Patroclus drawing back, smitten with the sharp bronze, came nigh him through the ranks, and smote him with a thrust of his spear in the nethermost belly, and drave the bronze clean through; and he fell with a thud, and sorely grieved the host of the Achaeans.
3422. And as a lion overmastereth in fight an untiring boar, when the twain fight with high hearts on the peaks of a mountain for a scant spring, wherefrom both are minded to drink: hard panteth the boar, yet the lion overcometh him by his might; even so from the valiant son of Menoetius, after he had slain many, did Hector, Priam's son, take life away, smiting him from close at hand with his spear.
3423. And vaunting over him he spake winged words: Patroclus, thou thoughtest, I ween, that thou wouldest sack our city, and from the women of Troy wouldest take the day of freedom, and bear them in thy ships to thy dear native land, thou fool.
3424. Nay, in front of them the swift horses of Hector stride forth to the fight, and with the spear I myself am pre-eminent among the war-loving Trojans, even I that ward from them the day of doom; but for thee, vultures shall devour thee here.
3425. Ah, poor wretch, even Achilles, for all his valour, availed thee not, who, I ween, though himself abiding behind, laid strait command upon thee, as thou wentest forth:
3426. Come not back, I charge thee, Patroclus, master of horsemen, So, I ween, spake he to thee, and persuaded thy wits in thy witlessness.
3427. Then, thy strength all spent, didst thou answer him, knight Patroclus:
3428. For this time, Hector, boast thou mightily; for to thee have Zeus, the son of Cronos, and Apollo, vouchsafed victory, they that subdued me full easily, for of themselves they took the harness from my shoulders.
3429. But if twenty such as thou had faced me, here would all have perished, slain by my spear.
3430. Nay, it was baneful Fate and the son of Leto that slew me, and of men Euphorbus, while thou art the third in my slaying.
3431. And another thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to heart: verily thou shalt not thyself be long in life, but even now doth death stand hard by thee, and mighty fate, that thou be slain beneath the hands of Achilles, the peerless son of Aeacus.
3432. Even as he thus spake the end of death enfolded him; and his soul fleeting from his limbs was gone to Hades, bewailing her fate, leaving manliness and youth.
3433. And to him even in his death spake glorious Hector: Patroclus, wherefore dost thou prophesy for me sheer destruction?
3434. Who knows but that Achilles, the son of fair - tressed Thetis, may first be smitten by my spear, and lose his life?
3435. So saying, he drew forth the spear of bronze from the wound, setting his foot upon the dead, and thrust him backward from the spear.
3436. And forthwith he was gone with his spear after Automedon, the god-like squire of the swift - footed son of Aeacus, for he was fain to smite him; but his swift horses bare him away, the immortal horses that the gods gave as glorious gifts to Peleus.
3437. And the son of Atreus, Menelaus, dear to Ares, failed not to mark that Patroclus had been slain in battle by the Trojans, but fared amid the foremost fighters, harnessed in flaming bronze, and bestrode the dead, as over a calf standeth lowing plaintively its mother, that hath brought forth her first -born, ere then knowing naught of motherhood; even so over Patroclus strode fair - haired Menelaus, and before him he held his spear and his shield that was well - balanced upon every side, eager to slay the man who should come to seize the corpse.
3438. Then was Panthous' son, of the good spear of ash, not unheedful of the falling of peerless Patroclus, but he took his stand hard by him, and spake to Menelaus, dear to Ares: Menelaus, son of Atreus, fostered of Zeus, thou leader of hosts, give back, and leave the corpse, and let be the bloody spoils; for before me no man of the Trojans and their famed allies smote Patroclus with the spear in the fierce conflict; wherefore suffer thou me to win goodly renown among the Trojans, lest I cast and smite thee, and rob thee of honey -sweet life.
3439. Then, his heart mightily stirred, fair - haired Menelaus spake unto him: O father Zeus, no good thing is it to boast overweeningly.
3440. Verily neither is the spirit of pard so high, nor of lion, nor of wild boar, of baneful mind, in whose breast the greatest fury exulteth exceedingly in might, as is the spirit of Panthous' sons, of the good spear of ash.
3441. Nay, but in sooth even the mighty Hyperenor, tamer of horses, had no profit of his youth, when he made light of me and abode my coming, and deemed that among the Danaans I was the meanest warrior; not on his own feet, I ween, did he fare home to make glad his dear wife and his worthy parents.
3442. Even so, meseems, shall I loose thy might as well, if thou stand to face me; nay, of myself I bid thee get thee back into the throng, and stand not forth to face me, ere yet some evil befall thee; when it is wrought even a fool getteth understanding.
3443. So spake he, yet persuaded not the other, but he answered, saying:
3444. Now in good sooth, Menelaus, nurtured of Zeus, shalt thou verily pay the price for my brother whom thou slewest, and over whom thou speakest vauntingly; and thou madest his wife a widow in her new-built bridal chamber, and broughtest grief unspeakable and sorrow upon his parents.
3445. Verily for them in their misery should I prove an assuaging of grief, if I but bring thy head and thy armour and lay them in the hands of Panthous and queenly Phrontis.
3446. Howbeit not for long shall the struggle be untried or unfought, be it for victory or for flight.
3447. So saying, he smote upon his shield that was well - balanced upon every side; howbeit the bronze brake not through, but its point was bent back in the stout shield.
3448. Then in turn did Atreus' son, Menelaus, rush upon him with his spear, and made prayer to father Zeus; and as he gave back, stabbed him at the base of the throat, and put his weight into the thrust, trusting in his heavy hand; and clean out through the tender neck passed the point.
3449. And he fell with a thud, and upon him his armour clanged.
3450. In blood was his hair drenched, that was like the hair of the Graces, and his tresses that were braided with gold and silver.
3451. And as a man reareth a lusty sapling of an olive in a lonely place, where water welleth up abundantly — a goodly sapling and a fair - growing; and the blasts of all the winds make it to quiver, and it burgeoneth out with white blossoms; but suddenly cometh the wind with a mighty tempest, and teareth it out of its trench, and layeth it low upon the earth; even in such wise did Menelaus, son of Atreus, slay Panthous' son, Euphorbus of the good ashen spear, and set him to spoil him of his armour.
3452. And as when a mountain - nurtured lion, trusting in his might, hath seized from amid a grazing herd the heifer that is goodliest: her neck he seizeth first in his strong jaws, and breaketh it, and thereafter devoureth the blood and all the inward parts in his fury; and round about him hounds and herds - men folk clamour loudly from afar, but have no will to come against him, for pale fear taketh hold on them; even so dared not the heart in the breast of any Trojan go to face glorious Menelaus.
3453. Full easily then would Atreus' son have borne off the glorious armour of the son of Panthous, but that Phoebus Apollo begrudged it him, and in the likeness of a man, even of Mentes, leader of the Cicones, aroused against him Hector, the peer of swift Ares.
3454. And he spake and addressed him in winged words:
3455. Hector, now art thou hasting thus vainly after what thou mayest not attain, even the horses of the wise - hearted son of Aeacus; but hard are they for mortal men to master or to drive, save only for Achilles, whom an immortal mother bare.
3456. Meanwhile hath warlike Menelaus, son of Atreus, bestridden Patroclus, and slain the best man of the Trojans, even Panthous' son, Euphorbus, and hath made him cease from his furious valour.
3457. So spake he, and went back again, a god into the toil of men.
3458. But the soul of Hector was darkly clouded with dread sorrow, and he glanced then along the lines, and forthwith was ware of the one stripping off the glorious arms, and of the other lying on the ground; and the blood was flowing down from the stricken wound.
3459. Then strode he forth amid the foremost fighters, harnessed in flaming bronze, crying a shrill cry, in fashion like unto the flame of Hephaestus that none may quench.
3460. Nor was his shrill cry unheard of the son of Atreus, but sore troubled he spake to his own great-hearted spirit:
3461. Ah, woe is me !
3462. If I leave behind the goodly arms, and Patroclus, that here lieth low for that he would get me recompense, I fear lest many a Danaan wax wroth against me, whosoever beholdeth it.
3463. But if for very shame I, that am alone, do battle with Hector and the Trojans, I fear lest haply they beset me round about, many against one; for all the Trojans is Hector of the flashing helm leading hitherward.
3464. But why doth my heart thus hold converse with me?
3465. Whenso a warrior is minded against the will of heaven to fight with another whom a god honoureth, forthwith then upon him rolleth mighty woe.
3466. Therefore shall no man of the Danaans wax wroth against me, whoso shall mark me giving ground before Hector, seeing he fighteth with the help of heaven.
3467. But if I might anywhere find Aias, good at the war-cry, then might we twain turn back and bethink us of fight, even were it against the will of heaven, in hope to save the dead for Achilles, Peleus' son: of ills that were the best.
3468. While he pondered thus in mind and heart, meanwhile the ranks of the Trojans came on, and Hector led them.
3469. Then Menelaus gave ground backward, and left the corpse, ever turning him about like a bearded lion that dogs and men drive from a fold with spears and shouting; and the valiant heart in his breast groweth chill, and sore loth he fareth from the farmstead; even so from Patroclus went fair - haired Menelaus.
3470. But he turned him about and stood, when he reached the throng of his comrades, glancing this way and that for great Aias, son of Telamon.
3471. Him he marked full quickly on the left of the whole battle, heartening his comrades, and urging them on to fight, for wondrous fear had Phoebus Apollo cast upon them.
3472. And he set him to run, and straightway came up to him, and spake, saying: Aias, come hither, good friend, let us hasten in defence of the dead Patroclus, if so be we may bear forth his corpse at least to Achilles — his naked corpse; but his armour is held by Hector of the flashing helm.
3473. So spake he, and stirred the soul of wise - hearted Aias, and he strode amid the foremost fighters, and with him fair - haired Menelaus.
3474. Now Hector, when he had stripped from Patroclus his glorious armour, sought to hale him away that he might cut the head from off his shoulders with the sharp bronze, and drag off the corpse, and give it to the dogs of Troy; but Aias drew near, bearing his shield, that was like a city wall.
3475. Then Hector gave ground backward into the throng of his comrades, and leapt upon his chariot, and gave the goodly armour to the Trojans to bear to the city, to be a great glory unto him.
3476. But Aias covered the son of Menoetius round about with his broad shield, and stood as a lion over his whelps, one that huntsmen have encountered in the forest as he leadeth his young; then he exulteth in his strength, and draweth down all his brows to cover his eyes; even so did Aias bestride the warrior Patroclus, and hard by him stood the son of Atreus, Menelaus, dear to Ares, nursing great sorrow in his breast.
3477. And Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, leader of the Lycians, with an angry glance from beneath his brows, chid Hector with hard words, saying: Hector, most fair to look upon, in battle art thou sorely lacking.
3478. In good sooth'tis but in vain that fair renown possesseth thee that art but a runagate.
3479. Bethink thee now how by thyself thou mayest save thy city and home aided only by the folk that were born in Ilios; for of the Lycians at least will no man go forth to do battle with the Danaans for the city's sake, seeing there were to be no thanks, it seemeth, for warring against the foemen ever without respite.
3480. How art thou like to save a meaner man amid the press of battle, thou heartless one, when Sarpedon, that was at once thy guest and thy comrade, thou didst leave to the Argives to be their prey and spoil ! — one that full often proved a boon to thee, to thy city and thine own self, while yet he lived; whereas now thou hadst not the courage to ward from him the dogs.
3481. Wherefore now, if any one of the men of Lycia will hearken to me, homeward will we go, and for Troy shall utter destruction be made plain.
3482. Ah, that there were now in the Trojans dauntless courage, that knoweth naught of fear, such as cometh upon men that for their country's sake toil and strive with foemen; then forthwith should we hale Patroclus into Ilios.
3483. And if this man were to come, a corpse, to the great city of king Priam, and we should hale him forth from out the battle, straightway then would the Argives give back the goodly armour of Sarpedon, and we should bring his body into Ilios; for such a man is he whose squire hath been slain, one that is far the best of the Argives by the ships, himself and his squires that fight in close combat.
3484. But thou hadst not the courage to stand before great-hearted Aias, facing him eye to eye amid the battle - cry of the foemen, nor to do battle against him, seeing he is a better man than thou.
3485. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows, spake to him Hector of the flashing helm: Glaucus, wherefore hast thou, being such a one as thou art, spoken an overweening word?
3486. Good friend, in sooth I deemed that in wisdom thou wast above all others that dwell in deep-soiled Lycia; but now have I altogether scorn of thy wits, that thou speakest thus, seeing thou sayest I stood not to face mighty Aias.
3487. I shudder not at battle, I tell thee, nor at the din of chariots, but ever is the intent of Zeus that beareth the aegis strongest, for he driveth even a valiant man in rout, and robbeth him of victory full easily, and again of himself he rouseth men to fight.
3488. Nay, come thou hither, good friend, take thy stand by my side, and behold my handiwork, whether this whole day through I shall prove me a coward, as thou pratest, or shall stay many a one of the Danaans, how fierce soever for valorous deeds he be, from fighting in defence of the dead Patroclus.
3489. So saying, he shouted aloud, and called to the Trojans: Ye Trojans, and Lycians, and Dardanians that fight in close combat, be men, my friends, and bethink you of furious valour, until I put upon me the armour of peerless Achilles, the goodly armour that I stripped from the mighty Patroclus, when I slew him.
3490. When he had thus spoken, Hector of the flashing helm went forth from the fury of war, and ran, and speedily reached his comrades not yet far off, hastening after them with swift steps, even them that were bearing toward the city the glorious armour of the son of Peleus.
3491. Then he halted apart from the tear - fraught battle, and changed his armour; his own he gave to the war-loving Trojans to bear to sacred Ilios, but clad himself in the immortal armour of Peleus' son, Achilles, that the heavenly gods had given to his father and that he had given to his son, when he himself waxed old; howbeit in the armour of the father the son came not to old age.
3492. But when Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, beheld him from afar as he harnessed him in the battle - gear of the godlike son of Peleus, he shook his head, and thus he spake unto his own heart:
3493. Ah, poor wretch, death verily is not in thy thoughts, that yet draweth nigh thee; but thou art putting upon thee the immortal armour of a princely man before whom others besides thee are wont to quail.
3494. His comrade, kindly and valiant, hast thou slain, and in unseemly wise hast stripped the armour from his head and shoulders.
3495. Howbeit for this present will I vouch - safe thee great might, in recompense for this — that in no wise shalt thou return from out the battle for Andromache to receive from thee the glorious armour of the son of Peleus.
3496. The son of Cronos spake and bowed thereto with his dark brows, and upon Hector's body he made the armour to fit, and there entered into him Ares, the dread Enyalius, and his limbs were filled within with valour and with might.
3497. Then went he his way into the company of the famed allies, crying a great cry, and shewed himself before the eyes of all, flashing in the armour of the great-souled son of Peleus.
3498. And going to and fro he spake and heartened each man, Mesthles and Glaucus and Medon and Thersilochus and Asteropaeus and Deisenor and Hippothous and Phorcys and Chroraius and Ennomus, the augur — these he heartened, and spake to them winged words:
3499. Hear me, ye tribes uncounted of allies that dwell round about.
3500. Not because I sought for numbers or had need thereof, did I gather each man of you from, your cities, but that with ready hearts ye might save the Trojans' wives and their little children from the war-loving Achaeans.
3501. With this intent am I wasting the substance of mine own folk that ye may have gifts and food, and thereby I cause the strength of each one of you to wax.
3502. Wherefore let every man turn straight against the foe and die haply, or live; for this is the dalliance of war.
3503. And whosoever shall hale Patroclus, dead though he be, into the midst of the horse - taming Trojans, and make Aias to yield, the half of the spoils shall I render unto him, and the half shall I keep mine ownself; and his glory shall be even as mine own.
3504. So spake he, and they charged straight against the Danaans with all their weight, holding their spears on high, and their hearts within them were full of hope to drag the corpse froma beneath Aias, son of Telamon — fools that they were !
3505. Verily full many did he rob of life over that corpse.
3506. Then spake Aias unto Menelaus, good at the war-cry, Good Menelaus, fostered of Zeus, no more have I hope that we twain by ourselves alone shall win back from out the war.
3507. In no wise have I such dread for the corpse of Patroclus that shall presently glut the dogs and birds of the Trojans, as I have for mine own life, lest some evil befall, and for thine as well, for a cloud of war compasseth everything about, even Hector, and for us is utter destruction plain to see.
3508. Howbeit, come thou, call upon the chieftains of the Danaans, if so be any may hear.
3509. So spake he, and Menelaus, good at the war-cry, failed not to hearken, but uttered a piercing shout and called to the Danaans: Friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, ye that at the board of the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus, drink at the common cost, and give commands each one to his folk — ye upon whom attend honour and glory from Zeus — hard is it for me to discern each man of the chieftains, in such wise is the strife of war ablaze.
3510. Nay, let every man go forth unbidden, and have shame at heart that Patroclus should become the sport of the dogs of Troy.
3511. So spake he, and swift Aias, son of Oileus, heard him clearly, and was first to come running to meet him amid the battle, and after him Idomeneus and Idomeneus' comrade, Meriones, the peer of Enyalius, slayer of men.
3512. But of the rest, what man of his own wit could name the names — of all that came after these and aroused the battle of the Achaeans?
3513. Then the Trojans drave forward in close throng, and Hector led them.
3514. And as when at the mouth of some heaven - fed river the mighty wave roareth against the stream, and the headlands of the shore echo on either hand, as the salt - sea belloweth without; even with such din of shouting came on the Trojans.
3515. But the Achaeans stood firm about the son of Menoetius with oneness of heart, fenced about with shields of bronze.
3516. And the son of Cronos shed thick darkness over their bright helms, for even aforetime was the son of Menoetius nowise hated of him, while he was yet alive and the squire of the son of Aeacus; and now was Zeus full loath that he should become the sport of the dogs of his foemen, even them of Troy; wherefore Zeus roused his comrades to defend him.
3517. And first the Trojans drave back the bright -eyed Achaeans, who left the corpse and shrank back before them; howbeit not a man did the Trojans high of heart slay with their spears, albeit they were fain, but they set them to hale the corpse.
3518. Yet for but scant space were the Achaeans to hold back therefrom, for full speedily did Aias rally them —
3519. Aias that in comeliness and in deeds of war was above all the other Danaans next to the peerless son of Peleus.
3520. Straight through the foremost fighters he strode, in might like a wild boar that, amid the mountains lightly scattereth hounds and lusty youths when he wheeleth upon them in the glades; even so the son of lordly Telamon, glorious Aias, when he had got among them lightly scattered the battalions of the Trojans, that had taken their stand above Patroclus, and were fain above all to hale him to their city, and get them glory.
3521. Now Hippothous, the glorious son of Pelasgian Lethus, was dragging the corpse by the foot through the fierce conflict, and had bound his baldric about the tendons of either ankle, doing pleasure unto Hector and the Trojans.
3522. But full swiftly upon him came evil that not one of them could ward off, how fain soever they were.
3523. For the son of Telamon, darting upon him through the throng, smote him from close at hand through the helmet with cheek - pieces of bronze; and the helm with horse - hair crest was cloven about the spear-point, smitten by the great spear and the strong hand; and the brain spurted forth from the wound along the socket of the spear all mingled with blood.
3524. There then his strength was loosed, and from his hands he let fall to lie upon the ground the foot of great-hearted Patroclus, and hard thereby himself fell headlong upon the corpse, far from deep - soiled Larissa; nor paid he back to his dear parents the recompense of his upbringing, and but brief was the span of his life, for that he was laid low by the spear of great-souled Aias.
3525. And Hector in turn cast at Aias with his bright spear, but Aias, looking steadily at him, avoided the spear of bronze albeit by a little, and Hector smote Schedius, son of great - souled Iphitus, far the best of the Phocians, that dwelt in a house in famous Panopeus, and was king over many men.
3526. Him Hector smote beneath the midst of the collar - bone, and clean through passed the point of bronze, and came out beneath the base of the shoulder.
3527. And he fell with a thud, and upon him his armour clanged.
3528. And Aias in his turn smote wise - hearted Phorcys, son of Phaenops, full upon the belly as he bestrode Hippothous, and he brake the plate of his corselet, and the bronze let forth the bowels there - through; and he fell in the dust and clutched the earth in his palm.
3529. Thereat the foremost fighters and glorious Hector gave ground, and the Argives shouted aloud, and drew off the dead, even Phorcys and Hippothous, and set them to strip the armour from their shoulders.
3530. Then would the Trojans have been driven again by the Achaeans, dear to Ares, up to Ilios, vanquished in their cowardice, and the Argives would have won glory even beyond the allotment of Zeus, by reason of their might and their strength, had not Apollo himself aroused Aeneas, taking upon him the form of the herald, Periphas, son of Epytos, that in the house of his old father had grown old in his heraldship, and withal was of kindly mind toward him.
3531. In his likeness spake unto Aeneas the son of Zeus, Apollo: Aeneas, how could ye ever guard steep Ilios, in defiance of a god?
3532. In sooth I have seen other men that had trust in their strength and might, in their valour and in their host, and that held their realm even in defiance of Zeus.
3533. But for us Zeus willeth the victory far more than for the Danaans; yet yourselves ye have measureless fear, and fight not.
3534. So spake he, and Aeneas knew Apollo that smiteth afar, when he looked upon his face, and he called aloud, and spake to Hector: Hector, and ye other leaders of the Trojans and allies, shame verily were this, if before the Achaeans, dear to Ares, we be driven back to Ilios, vanquished in our cowardice.
3535. Howbeit even yet, declareth one of the gods that stood by my side, is Zeus, the counsellor most high, our helper in the fight.
3536. Wherefore let us make straight for the Danaans, and let it not be at their ease that they bring to the ships the dead Patroclus.
3537. So spake he, and leapt forth far to the front of the foremost fighters, and there stood.
3538. And they rallied, and took their stand with their faces toward the Achaeans.
3539. Then Aeneas wounded with a thrust of his spear Leocritus, son of Arisbas and valiant comrade of Lycomedes.
3540. And as he fell Lycomedes, dear to Ares, had pity for him, and came and stood hard by and with a cast of his bright spear smote Apisaon, son of Hippasus, shepherd of the host, in the liver, below the midriff, and straightway loosed his knees —
3541. Apisaon that was come from out of deep-soiled Paeonia, and next to Asteropaeus was preeminent above them all in fight.
3542. But as he fell warlike Asteropaeus had pity for him, and he too rushed onward, fain to fight with the Danaans; howbeit thereto could he no more avail, for with shields were they fenced in on every side, as they stood around Patroclus, and before them they held their spears.
3543. For Aias ranged to and fro among them and straitly charged every man; not one, he bade them, should give ground backward from the corpse, nor yet fight in front of the rest of the Achaeans as one pre-eminent above them all; but stand firm close beside the corpse and do battle hand to hand.
3544. Thus mighty Aias charged them, and the earth grew wet with dark blood, and the dead fell thick and fast alike of the Trojans and their mighty allies, and of the Danaans; for these too fought not without shedding of blood, howbeit fewer of them by far were falling; for they ever bethought them to ward utter destruction from one another in the throng.
3545. So fought they like unto blazing fire, nor wouldst thou have deemed that sun or moon yet abode, for with darkness were they shrouded in the fight, all the chieftains that stood around the slain son of Menoetius.
3546. But the rest of the Trojans and the well - greaved Achaeans fought at their ease under clear air, and over them was spread the piercing brightness of the sun, and on all the earth and the mountains was no cloud seen; and they fought resting themselves at times, avoiding one another's shafts, fraught with groaning, and standing far apart.
3547. But those in the midst suffered woes by reason of the darkness and the war, and were sore distressed with the pitiless bronze, even all they that were chieftains.
3548. Howbeit two men that were famous warriors, even Thrasymedes and Antilochus, had not yet learned that peerless Patroclus was dead, but deemed that, yet alive, he was fighting with the Trojans in the forefront of the throng.
3549. And they twain, watching against the death and rout of their comrades, were warring in a place apart, for thus had Nestor bidden them, when he roused them forth to the battle from the black ships.
3550. So then the whole day through raged the great strife of their cruel fray, and with the sweat of toil were the knees and legs and feet of each man beneath him ever ceaselessly bedewed, and his arms and eyes, as the two hosts fought about the goodly squire of swift - footed Achilles.
3551. And as when a man giveth to his people the hide of a great bull for stretching, all drenched in fat, and when they have taken it, they stand in a circle and stretch it, and forthwith its moisture goeth forth and the fat entereth in under the tugging of many hands, and all the hide is stretched to the uttermost; even so they on this side and on that were haling the corpse hither and thither in scant space; and their hearts within them were full of hope, the Trojans that they might drag him to Ilios, but the Achaeans to the hollow ships; and around him the battle waxed wild, nor could even Ares, rouser of hosts, nor Athene, at sight of that strife have made light thereof, albeit their anger were exceeding great.
3552. Such evil toil of men and horses did Zeus on that day strain taut over Patroclus.
3553. Nor as yet did goodly Achilles know aught of Patroclus' death, for afar from the swift ships were they fighting beneath the wall of the Trojans.
3554. Wherefore Achilles never deemed in his heart that he was dead, but that he would return alive, after he had reached even to the gates; nor yet thought he this in any wise, that Patroclus would sack the city without him, nay, nor with him, for full often had he heard this from his mother, listening to her privily, whenso she brought him tidings of the purpose of great Zeus.
3555. Howbeit then his mother told him not how great an evil had been brought to pass, that his comrade, far the dearest, had been slain.
3556. But the others round about the corpse, with sharp spears in their hands, ever pressed on continually, and slew each other.
3557. And thus would one of the brazen - coated Achaeans say: Friends, no fair fame verily were it for us to return back to the hollow ships; nay, even here let the black earth gape for us all.
3558. That were for us straightway better far, if we are to yield this man to the Trojans, tamers of horses, to hale to their city, and win them glory.
3559. And thus in like manner would one of the great-hearted Trojans speak: Friends, though it be our fate all together to be slain beside this man, yet let none give backward from the fight.
3560. Thus would one speak and arouse the might of each.
3561. So they fought on, and the iron din went up through the unresting air to the brazen heaven.
3562. But the horses of the son of Aeacus being apart from the battle were weeping, since first they learned that their charioteer had fallen in the dust beneath the hands of man-slaying Hector.
3563. In sooth Automedon, valiant son of Diores, full often plied them with blows of the swift lash, and full often with gentle words bespake them, and oft with threatenings; yet neither back to the ships to the broad Hellespont were the twain minded to go, not yet into the battle amid the Achaeans.
3564. Nay, as a pillar abideth firm that standeth on the tomb of a dead man or woman, even so abode they immovably with the beauteous car, bowing their heads down to the earth.
3565. And hot tears ever flowed from their eyes to the ground, as they wept in longing for their charioteer, and their rich manes were befouled, streaming from beneath the yoke - pad beside the yoke on this aide and on that.
3566. And as they mourned, the son of Cronos had sight of them and was touched with pity, and he shook his head, and thus spake unto his own heart:
3567. Ah unhappy pair, wherefore gave we you to king Peleus, to a mortal, while ye are ageless and immortal?
3568. Was it that among wretched men ye too should have sorrows?
3569. For in sooth there is naught, I ween, more miserable than man among all things that breathe and move upon earth.
3570. Yet verily not upon you and your car, richly - dight, shall Hector, Priam's son, mount; that will I not suffer.
3571. Sufficeth it not that he hath the armour and therewithal vaunteth him vainly?
3572. Nay, in your knees and in your heart will I put strength, to the end that ye may also bear Automedon safe out of the war to the hollow ships; for still shall I vouchsafe glory to the Trojans, to slay and slay, until they come to the well - benched ships, and the sun sets and sacred darkness cometh on.
3573. So saying he breathed great might into the horses.
3574. And the twain shook the dust from their manes to the ground, and fleetly bare the swift car amid the Trojans and Achaeans.
3575. And behind them fought Automedon, albeit he sorrowed for his comrade, swooping with his car as a vulture on a flock of geese, for lightly would he flee from out the battle- din of the Trojans, and lightly charge, setting upon them through the great throng.
3576. Howbeit no man might he slay as he hasted to pursue them, for in no wise was it possible for him being alone in the sacred car, to assail them with the spear, and withal to hold the swift horses.
3577. But at last a comrade espied him with his eyes, even Alcimedon, son of Laerces, son of Haemon, and he halted behind the chariot and spake unto Automedon: Automedon, what god hath put in thy breast unprofitable counsel and taken from thee thy heart of understanding, that thus in the foremost throng thou fightest with the Trojans, alone as thou art?
3578. For thy comrade hath been slain, and his armour Hector weareth on his own shoulders, even the armour of the son of Aeacus, and glorieth therein.
3579. To him then made answer Automedon, son of Diores: Alcimedon, what man beside of the Achaeans is of like worth to curb and guide the spirit of immortal steeds, save only Patroclus, the peer of the gods in counsel, while yet he lived?
3580. But now death and fate have come upon him.
3581. Howbeit take thou the lash and the shining reins, and I will dismount to fight So spake he, and Alcimedon leapt upon the car that was swift in battle, and quickly grasped in his hands the lash and reins; and Automedon leapt down.
3582. And glorious Hector espied them, and forthwith spake to Aeneas, that was near: Aeneas, counsellor of the brazen - coated Trojans, yonder I espy the two horses of the swift - footed son of Aeacus coming forth to view into the battle with weakling charioteers.
3583. These twain might I hope to take, if thou in thy heart art willing, seeing the men would not abide the oncoming of us two, and stand to contend with us in battle.
3584. So spake he, and the valiant son of Anchises failed not to hearken.
3585. And the twain went straight forward, their shoulders clad with shields of bull's -hide, dry and tough, and abundant bronze had been welded thereupon.
3586. And with them went Chromius, and godlike Aretus both, and their hearts within them were full of hope to slay the men and drive off the horses with high - arched necks — fools that they were !
3587. for not without shedding of blood were they to get them back from Automedon.
3588. He made prayer to father Zeus, and his dark heart within him was filled with valour and strength; and forthwith he spake to Alcimedon, his trusty comrade: Alcimedon, not afar from me do thou hold the horses, but let their breath smite upon my very back; for I verily deem not that Hector, son of Priam, will be stayed from his fury until he mount behind the fair - maned horses of Achilles, and have slain the two of us, and driven in rout the ranks of the Argive warriors, or haply himself be slain amid the foremost.
3589. So spake he, and called to the two Aiantes and to Menelaus:
3590. Ye Aiantes twain, leaders of the Argives, and thou Menelaus, lo now, leave ye the corpse in charge of them that are bravest to stand firm about it and to ward off the ranks of men; but from us twain that yet live ward ye off the pitiless day of doom, for here are pressing hard in tearful war Hector and Aeneas, the best men of the Trojans.
3591. Yet these things verily lie on the knees of the gods: I too will cast, and the issue shall rest with Zeus.
3592. He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled it, and smote upon the shield of Aretus, that was well - balanced upon every side, and this stayed not the spear, but the bronze passed clean through, and into the lower belly he drave it through the belt.
3593. And as when a strong man with sharp axe in hand smiteth behind the horns of an ox of the steading and cutteth clean through the sinew, and the ox leapeth forward and falleth; even so Aretus leapt forward and fell upon his back, and the spear, exceeding sharp, fixed quivering in his entrails loosed his limbs.
3594. But Hector cast at Automedon with his bright spear, howbeit he, looking steadily at him, avoided the spear of bronze, for he stooped forward, and the long spear fixed itself in the ground behind him, and the butt of the spear quivered; howbeit there at length did mighty
3595. Ares stay its fury.
3596. And now had they clashed with their swords in close fight but that the twain Aiantes parted them in their fury, for they came through the throng at the call of their comrade, and seized with fear of them Hector and Aeneas and godlike Chromius gave ground again and left Aretus lying there stricken to the death.
3597. And Automedon, the peer of swift Ares, despoiled him of his armour, and exulted, saying:
3598. Verily a little have I eased mine heart of grief for the death of Menoetius' son, though it be but a worse man that I have slain.
3599. So saying, he took up the bloody spoils, and set them in the car, and himself mounted thereon, his feet and his hands above all bloody, even as a lion that hath devoured a bull.
3600. Then again over Patroclus was strained taut the mighty conflict, dread and fraught with tears, and Athene roused the strife, being come down from heaven; for Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, had sent her to urge on the Danaans, for lo, his mind was turned.
3601. As Zeus stretcheth forth for mortals a lurid rainbow from out of heaven to be a portent whether of war or of chill storm that maketh men to cease from their work upon the face of the earth, and vexeth the flocks; even so Athene, enwrapping herself in a lurid cloud, entered the throng of the Danaans, and urged on each man.
3602. First to hearten him she spake to Atreus' son, valiant Menelaus, for he was nigh to her, likening herself to Phoenix, in form and untiring voice:
3603. To thee, verily, Menelaus, shall there be shame and a hanging of the head, if the trusty comrade of lordly Achilles he torn by swift dogs beneath the wall of the Trojans.
3604. Nay, hold thy ground valiantly, and urge on all the host.
3605. Then Menelaus, good at the war-cry, answered her: Phoenix, old sire, my father of ancient days, would that Athene may give me strength and keep from me the onrush of darts.
3606. So should I be full fain to stand by Patroclus' side and succour him; for in sooth his death hath touched me to the heart.
3607. Howbeit, Hector hath the dread fury of fire, and ceaseth not to make havoc with the bronze; for it is to him that Zeus vouchsafeth glory.
3608. So spake he, and the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, waxed glad, for that to her first of all the gods he made his prayer.
3609. And she put strength into his shoulders and his knees, and in his breast set the daring of the fly, that though it be driven away never so often from the skin of a man, ever persisteth in biting, and sweet to it is the blood of man; even with such daring filled she his dark heart within him, and he stood over Patroclus and hurled with his bright spear.
3610. Now among the Trojans was one Podes, son of Eetion, a rich man and a valiant, and Hector honoured him above all the people, for that he was his comrade, a welcome companion at the feast.
3611. Him, fair - haired Menelaus smote upon the belt with a spear cast as he started to flee, and drave the bronze clean through; and he fell with a thud.
3612. But Menelaus, son of Atreus, dragged the dead body from amid the Trojans into the throng of his comrades.
3613. Then unto Hector did Apollo draw nigh, and urged him on, in the likeness of Asius' son Phaenops, that of all his guest-friends was dearest to him, and had his house at Abydus.
3614. In his likeness Apollo that worketh afar spake unto Hector: Hector, what man beside of the Achaeans will fear thee any more, seeing thou hast thus quailed before Menelaus, who aforetime was a weakling warrior?
3615. Now with none to aid him hath he taken the dead from out the ranks of the Trojans and is gone — aye, he hath slain thy trusty comrade, a good man among the foremost fighters, even Podes, son of Eetion.
3616. So spake he, and a black cloud of grief enwrapped Hector, and he strode amid the foremost fighters, harnessed in flaming bronze.
3617. And then the son of Cronos took his tasselled aegis, all gleaming bright, and enfolded Ida with clouds, and lightened and thundered mightily, and shook the aegis, giving victory to the Trojans, but the Achaeans he drave in rout.
3618. First to begin the rout was Peneleos the Boeotian.
3619. For as he abode ever facing the foe he was smitten on the surface of the shoulder with a spear, a grazing blow, but the spear-point of Polydamas cut even to the bone, for he it was that cast at him from nigh at hand.
3620. And Leitus again, the son of great-souled Alectryon, did Hector wound in close fight, on the hand at the wrist, and made him cease from fighting: and casting an anxious glance about him he shrank back, seeing he no more had hope that bearing spear in hand he might do battle with the Trojans.
3621. And as Hector pursued after Leitus, Idomeneus smote him upon the corselet, on the breast beside the nipple; but the long spear-shaft was broken in the socket, and the Trojans shouted aloud.
3622. And Hector cast at Idomeneus, Deucalion's son, as he stood upon his car, and missed him by but little; howbeit he smote Coeranus the comrade and charioteer of Meriones that followed him from out of well - built Lyctus — for on foot had Idomeneus come at the first from the curved ships, and would have yielded great victory to the Trojans, had not Coeranus speedily driven up the swift -footed horses.
3623. Thus to Idomeneus he came as a light of deliverance, and warded from him the pitiless day of doom, but him self lost his life at the hands of man-slaying Hector — this Coeranus did Hector smite beneath the jaw under the ear, and the spear dashed out his teeth by the roots, and clave his tongue asunder in the midst; and he fell from out the car, and let fall the reins down upon the ground.
3624. And Meriones stooped, and gathered them in his own hands from the earth, and spake to Idomeneus:
3625. Ply now the lash, until thou be come to the swift ships.
3626. Lo, even of thyself thou knowest that victory is no more with the Achaeans.
3627. So spake he, and Idomeneus lashed the fair - maned horses back to the hollow ships; for verily fear had fallen upon his soul.
3628. Nor were great-hearted Aias and Menelaus unaware how that Zeus was giving to the Trojans victory to turn the tide of battle; and of them great Telamonian Aias was first to speak, saying:
3629. Out upon it, now may any man, how foolish so ever he be, know that father Zeus himself is succouring the Trojans.
3630. For the missiles of all of them strike home, whosoever hurleth them, be he brave man or coward:
3631. Zeus in any case guideth them all aright; but for us the shafts of every man fall vainly to the ground.
3632. Nay, come, let us of ourselves devise the counsel that is best, whereby we may both hale away the corpse, and ourselves return home for the joy of our dear comrades, who methinks are sore distressed as they look hither - ward, and deem that the fury and the irresistible hands of man-slaying Hector will not be stayed, but will fall upon the black ships.
3633. But I would there were some comrade to bear word with all speed to the son of Peleus, for methinks he hath not even heard the woeful tale, that his dear comrade is slain.
3634. Howbeit, nowhere can I see such a one among the Achaeans, for in darkness are they all enwrapped, themselves and their horses withal.
3635. Father Zeus, deliver thou from the darkness the sons of the Achaeans, and make clear sky, and grant us to see with our eyes.
3636. In the light do thou e'en slay us, seeing such is thy good pleasure.
3637. So spake he, and the Father had pity on him as he wept, and forthwith scattered the darkness and drave away the mist, and the sun shone forth upon them and all the battle was made plain to view.
3638. Then Aias spake unto Menelaus, good at the war -cry:
3639. Look forth now, Menelaus, nurtured of Zeus, if so be thou mayest have sight of Antilochus yet alive, son of great - souled Nestor, and bestir thou him to go with speed unto Achilles, wise of heart, to tell him that his comrade, far the dearest, is slain.
3640. So spake he, and Menelaus, good at the war-cry, failed not to hearken, but went his way as a lion from a steading when he waxeth weary with vexing dogs and men that suffer him not to seize the fattest of the herd, watching the whole night through; but he in his lust for flesh goeth straight on, yet accomplisheth naught thereby, for thick the darts fly to meet him, hurled by bold hands, and blazing brands withal, before which he quaileth, how eager soever he be, and at dawn he departeth with sure heart; even so from Patroclus departed Menelaus, good at the war-cry, sorely against his will; for exceedingly did he fear lest the Achaeans in sorry rout should leave him to be a prey to the foemen.
3641. And many a charge laid he on Meriones and the Aiantes, saying:
3642. Ye Aiantes twain, leaders of the Argives, and thou, Meriones, now let each man remember the kindliness of hapless Patroclus; for to all was he ever gentle while yet he lived, but now death and fate have come upon him.
3643. So saying fair - haired Menelaus departed, glancing warily on every side as an eagle, which, men say, hath the keenest sight of all winged things under heaven, of whom, though he be on high, the swift - footed hare is not unseen as he croucheth beneath a leafy bush, but the eagle swoopeth upon him and forthwith seizeth him, and robbeth him of life.
3644. Even so then, Menelaus, nurtured of Zeus, did thy bright eyes range everywhither over the throng of thy many comrades, if so be they niight have sight of Nestor's son yet alive.
3645. Him he marked full quickly on the left of the whole battle, heartening his comrades and urging them on to fight.
3646. And drawing nigh fair - haired Menelaus spake to him, saying: Antilochus, up, come hither, thou nurtured of Zeus, that thou mayest learn woeful tidings, such as I would had never been.
3647. Even now, I ween, thou knowest, for thine eyes behold it, how that a god rolleth ruin upon the Danaans, and that victory is with the men of Troy.
3648. And slain is the best man of the Achaeans, even Patroclus, and great longing for him is wrought for the Danaans.
3649. But do thou with speed run to the ships of the Achaeans and bear word unto Achilles, in hope that he may forthwith bring safe to his ship the corpse — the naked corpse; but his armour is held by Hector of the flashing helm.
3650. So spake he, and Antilochus had horror, as he heard that word.
3651. Long time was he speechless, and both his eyes were filled with tears, and the flow of his voice was checked.
3652. Yet not even so was he neglectful of the bidding of Menelaus, but set him to run, and gave his armour to his peerless comrade Laodocus, that hard beside him was wheeling his single - hoofed horses.
3653. Him then as he wept his feet bare forth from out the battle to bear an evil tale to Peleus' son Achilles.
3654. Nor was thy heart, Menelaus, nurtured of Zeus, minded to bear aid to the sore- pressed comrades from whom Antilochus was departed, and great longing was wrought for the men of Pylos.
3655. Howbeit, for their aid he sent goodly Thrasymedes, and himself went again to bestride the warrior Patroclus; and he ran, and took his stand beside the Aiantes, and forthwith spake to them:
3656. Yon man have I verily sent forth to the swift ships, to go to Achilles, fleet of foot.
3657. Howbeit I deem not that Achilles will come forth, how wroth soever he be against goodly Hector; for in no wise may he fight against the Trojans unarmed as he is.
3658. But let us of ourselves devise the counsel that is best, whereby we may both hale away the corpse, and ourselves escape death and fate amid the battle - din of the Trojans.
3659. Then great Telamonian Aias answered him:
3660. All this hast thou spoken aright, most glorious Menelaus.
3661. But do thou and Meriones stoop with all speed beneath the corpse, and raise him up, and bear him forth from out the toil of war; but behind you we twain will do battle with the Trojans and goodly Hector, one in heart as we are one in name, even we that aforetime have been wont to stand firm in fierce battle, abiding each by the other's side.
3662. So spake he, and the others took in their arms the dead from the ground, and lifted him on high in their great might; and thereat the host of the Trojans behind them shouted aloud, when they beheld the Achaeans lifting the corpse.
3663. And they charged straight upon them like hounds that in front of hunting youths dart upon a wounded wild boar: awhile they rush upon him fain to rend him asunder, but whenso he wheeleth among them trusting in his might, then they give ground and shrink in fear, one here, one there; even so the Trojans for a time ever followed on in throngs, thrusting with swords and two -edged spears, but whenso the twain Aiantes would wheel about and stand against them, then would their colour change, and no man dared dart forth and do battle for the dead.
3664. Thus the twain were hasting to bear the corpse forth from out the battle to the hollow ships, and against them was strained a conflict fierce as fire that, rushing upon a city of men with sudden onset, setteth it aflame, and houses fall amid the mighty glare, and the might of the wind driveth it roaring on.
3665. Even so against them as they went came ever the ceaseless din of chariots and of spearmen.
3666. But as mules that, putting forth on either side their great strength, drag forth from the mountain down a rugged path a beam haply, or a great ship - timber, and within them their hearts as they strive are distressed with toil alike and sweat; even so these hasted to bear forth the corpse.
3667. And behind them the twain Aiantes held back the foe, as a ridge holdeth back a flood — some wooded ridge that chanceth to lie all athwart a plain and that holdeth back even the dread streams of mighty rivers, and forthwith turneth the current of them all to wander over the plain, neither doth the might of their flood avail to break through it; even so the twain Aiantes ever kept back the battle of the Trojans, but these ever followed after and two among them above all others, even Aeneas, Anchises' son, and glorious Hector.
3668. And as flieth a cloud of starlings or of daws, shrieking cries of doom, when they see coming upon them a falcon that beareth death unto small birds; so before Aeneas and Hector fled the youths of the Achaeans, shrieking cries of doom, and forgat all fighting.
3669. And fair arms full many fell around and about the trench as the Danaans fled; but there was no ceasing from war.
3670. So fought they like unto blazing fire, but Antilochus, swift of foot, came to bear tidings to Achilles.
3671. Him he found in front of his ships with upright horns, boding in his heart the thing that even now was brought to pass; and sore troubled he spake unto his own great-hearted spirit:
3672. Ah, woe is me, how is it that again the long - haired Achaeans are being driven toward the ships in rout over the plain?
3673. Let it not be that the gods have brought to pass grievous woes for my soul, even as on a time my mother declared unto me, and said that while yet I lived the best man of the Myrmidons should leave the light of the sun beneath the hands of the Trojans !
3674. in good sooth the valiant son of Menoetius must now, be dead, foolhardy one.
3675. Surely I bade him come back again to the ships when he had thrust off the consuming fire, and not to fight amain with Hector.
3676. While he pondered thus in mind and heart, there drew nigh unto him the son of lordly Nestor, shedding hot tears, and spake the grievous tidings:
3677. Woe is me, thou son of wise - hearted Peleus, full grievous is the tidings thou must hear, such as I would had never been.
3678. Low lies Patroclus, and around his corpse are they fighting — his naked corpse; but his armour is held by Hector of the flashing helm.
3679. So spake he, and a black cloud of grief enwrapped Achilles, and with both his hands he took the dark dust and strewed it over his head and defiled his fair face, and on his fragrant tunic the black ashes fell.
3680. And himself in the dust lay outstretched, mighty in his mightiness, and with his own hands he tore and marred his hair.
3681. And the handmaidens, that Achilles and Patroclus had got them as booty, shrieked aloud in anguish of heart, and ran forth around wise - hearted Achilles, and all beat their breasts with their hands, and the knees of each one were loosed be-neath her.
3682. And over against them Antilochus wailed and shed tears, holding the hands of Achilles, that in his noble heart was moaning mightily; for he feared lest he should cut his throat asunder with the knife.
3683. Then terribly did Achilles groan aloud, and his queenly mother heard him as she sat in the depths of the sea beside the old man her father.
3684. Thereat she uttered a shrill cry, and the goddesses thronged about her, even all the daughters of Nereus that were in the deep of the sea.
3685. There were Glauce and Thaleia and Cymodoce, Nesaea and Speio and Thoë and ox -eyed Halië, and Cymothoë and Actaeä and Limnoreia, and Melite and Iaera and Amphithoe and Agave, Doto and Proto and Pherousa and Dynamene, and Dexamene and Amphinone and Callianeira, Doris and Pynope and glorious Galatea, Nemertes and Apseudes and Callianassa, and there were Clymene and Ianeira and Ianassa, Maera and Orithyia and fair - tressed Amatheia, and other Nereids that were in the deep of the sea.
3686. With these the bright cave was filled, and they all alike beat their breasts, and Thetis was leader in their lamenting: Listen, sister Nereids, that one and all ye may hear and know all the sorrows that are in my heart.
3687. Ah, woe is me unhappy, woe is me that bare to my sorrow the best of men, for after I had borne a son peerless and stalwart, pre-eminent among warriors, and he shot up like a sapling; then when I had reared him as a tree in a rich orchard plot, I sent him forth in the beaked ships to Ilios to war with the Trojans; but never again shall I welcome him back to his home, to the house of Peleus.
3688. And while yet he liveth, and beholdeth the light of the sun, he hath sorrow, neither can I anywise help him, though I go to him.
3689. Howbeit go I will, that I may behold my dear child, and hear what grief has come upon him while yet he abideth aloof from the war.
3690. So saying she left the cave, and the nymphs went with her weeping, and around them the waves of the sea were cloven asunder.
3691. And when they were come to the deep-soiled land of Troy they stepped forth upon the beach, one after the other, where the ships of the Myrmidons were drawn up in close lines round about swift Achilles.
3692. Then to his side, as he groaned heavily, came his queenly mother, and with a shrill cry she clasped the head of her son, and with wailing spake unto him winged words:
3693. My child, why weepest thou?
3694. What sorrow hath come upon thy heart.
3695. Speak out; hide it not.
3696. Thy wish has verily been brought to pass for thee by Zeus, as aforetime thou didst pray, stretching forth thy hands, even that one and all the sons of the Achaeans should be huddled at the sterns of the ships in sore need of thee, and should suffer cruel things.
3697. Then groaning heavily swift - footed Achilles answered her: My mother, these prayers verily hath the Olympian brought to pass for me, but what pleasure have I therein, seeing my dear comrade is dead, even Patroclus, whom I honoured above all my comrades, even as mine own self?
3698. Him have I lost, and his armour Hector that slew him hath stripped from him, that fair armour, huge of size, a wonder to behold, that the gods gave as a glorious gift to Peleus on the day when they laid thee in the bed of a mortal man.
3699. Would thou hadst remained where thou wast amid the immortal maidens of the sea, and that Peleus had taken to his home a mortal bride.
3700. But now — it was thus that thou too mightest have measureless grief at heart for thy dead son, whom thou shalt never again welcome to his home; for neither doth my own heart bid me live on and abide among men, unless Hector first, smitten by my spear, shall lose his life, and pay back the price for that he made spoil of Patroclus, son of Menoetius.
3701. Then Thetis again spake unto him, shedding tears the while:
3702. Doomed then to a speedy death, my child, shalt thou be, that thou spakest thus; for straightway after Hector is thine own death ready at hand.
3703. Then, mightily moved, swift - footed Achilles spake to her: Straightway may I die, seeing I was not to bear aid to my comrade at his slaying.
3704. Far, far from his own land hath he fallen, and had need of me to be a warder off of ruin.
3705. Now therefore, seeing I return not to my dear native land, neither proved anywise a light of deliverance to Patroclus nor to my other comrades, those many that have been slain by goodly Hector, but abide here by the ships.
3706. Profitless burden upon the earth — I that in war am such as is none other of the brazen - coated Achaeans, albeit in council there be others better — so may strife perish from among gods and men, and anger that setteth a man on to grow wroth, how wise soever he be, and that sweeter far than trickling honey waxeth like smoke in the breasts of men; even as but now the king of men, Agamemnon, moved me to wrath.
3707. Howbeit these things will we let be as past and done, for all our pain, curbing the heart in our breasts, because we must.
3708. But now will I go forth that I may light on the slayer of the man I loved, even on Hector; for my fate, I will accept it whenso Zeus willeth to bring it to pass, and the other immortal gods.
3709. For not even the mighty Heracles escaped death, albeit he was most dear to Zeus, son of Cronos, the king, but fate overcame him, and the dread wrath of Hera.
3710. So also shall I, if a like fate hath been fashioned for me, lie low when I am dead.
3711. But now let me win glorious renown, and set many a one among the deep - bosomed Trojan or Dardanian dames to wipe with both hands the tears from her tender cheeks, and ceaseless moaning; and let them know that long in good sooth have I kept apart from the war.
3712. Seek not then to hold me back from battle, for all thou lovest me; thou shalt not persuade me.
3713. Then answered him the goddess, silver - footed Thetis:
3714. Aye, verily, as thou sayest, my child, it is in truth no ill thing to ward utter destruction from thy comrades, that are hard beset.
3715. But thy goodly armour is held among the Trojans, thine armour of bronze, all gleaming - bright.
3716. This doth Hector of the flashing helm wear on his own shoulders, and exulteth therein.
3717. Yet I deem that not for long shall he glory therein.
3718. seeing his own death is nigh at hand.
3719. But do thou not enter into the turmoil of Ares until thine eyes shall behold me again coming hither.
3720. For in the morning will I return at the rising of the sun, bearing fair armour from the lord Hephaestus.
3721. So saying she turned her to go back from her son, and being turned she spake among her sisters of the sea:
3722. Do ye now plunge beneath the broad bosom of the deep, to visit the old man of the sea, and the halls of our father, and tell him all.
3723. But I will get me to high Olympus to the house of Hephaestus, the famed craftsman, if so be he will give to my son glorious shining armour.
3724. So spake she, and they forthwith plunged beneath the surge of the sea, while she, the goddess, silver - footed Thetis, went her way to Olympus, that she might bring glorious armour for her dear son.
3725. Her then were her feet bearing to Olympus, but the Achaeans fled with wondrous shouting from before man-slaying Hector, and came to the ships and the Hellespont.
3726. Howbeit Patroclus, the squire of Achilles, might the well - greaved Achaeans not draw forth from amid the darts; for now again there overtook him the host and the chariots of Troy, and Hector, son of Priam, in might as it were a flame.
3727. Thrice from behind did glorious Hector seize him by the feet, fain to drag him away, and called mightily upon the Trojans, and thrice did the two Aiantes, clothed in furious valour, hurl him back from the corpse.
3728. But he, ever trusting in his might, would now charge upon them in the fray, and would now stand and shout aloud; but backward would he give never a whit.
3729. And as shepherds of the steading avail not in any wise to drive from a carcase a tawny lion when he hungereth sore, even so the twain warrior Aiantes availed not to affright Hector, Priam's son, away from the corpse.
3730. And now would he have dragged away the body, and have won glory unspeakable, had not wind - footed, swift Iris speeding from Olympus with a message that he array him for battle, come to the son of Peleus, all unknown of Zeus and the other gods, for Hera sent her forth.
3731. And she drew nigh, and spake to him winged words:
3732. Rouse thee, son of Peleus, of all men most dread.
3733. Bear thou aid to Patroclus, for whose sake is a dread strife afoot before the ships.
3734. And men are slaying one another, these seeking to defend the corpse of the dead, while the Trojans charge on to drag him to windy Ilios; and above all glorious Hector is fain to drag him away; and his heart biddeth him shear the head from the tender neck, and fix it on the stakes of the wall.
3735. Nay, up then, lie here no more !
3736. Let awe come upon thy soul that Patroclus should become the sport of the dogs of Troy.
3737. Thine were the shame, if anywise he come, a corpse despitefully entreated.
3738. Then swift - footed goodly Achilles answered her: Goddess Iris, who of the gods sent thee a messenger to me?
3739. And to him again spake wind - footed, swift Iris: Hera sent me forth, the glorious wife of Zeus; and the son of Cronos, throned on high, knoweth naught hereof, neither any other of the immortals that dwell upon snowy Olympus.
3740. Then in answer to her spake Achilles, swift of foot:
3741. But how shall I enter the fray?
3742. They yonder hold my battle - gear; and my dear mother forbade that I array me for the fight until such time as mine eyes should behold her again coming hither; for she pledged her to bring goodly armour from Hephaestus.
3743. No other man know I whose glorious armour I might don, except it were the shield of Aias, son of Telamon.
3744. Howbeit himself, I ween, hath dalliance amid the foremost fighters, as he maketh havoc with his spear in defence of dead Patroclus.
3745. And to him again spake wind - footed, swift Iris:
3746. Well know we of ourselves that thy glorious armour is held of them; but even as thou art go thou to the trench, and show thyself to the men of Troy, if so be that, seized with fear of thee, the Trojans may desist from battle, and the warlike sons of the Achaeans may take breath, wearied as they are; for scant is the breathing - space in war.
3747. When she had thus spoken swift - footed Iris departed; but Achilles, dear to Zeus, roused him, and round about his mighty shoulders Athene flung her tasselled aegis, and around his head the fair goddess set thick a golden cloud, and forth from the man made blaze a gleaming fire.
3748. And as when a smoke goeth up from a city and reacheth to heaven from afar, from an island that foes beleaguer, and the men thereof contend the whole day through in hateful war from their city's walls, and then at set of sun flame forth the beacon - fires one after another and high aloft darteth the glare thereof for dwellers round about to behold, if so be they may come in their ships to be warders off of bane; even so from the head of Achilles went up the gleam toward heaven.
3749. Then strode he from the wall to the trench, and there took his stand, yet joined him not to the company of the Achaeans, for he had regard to his mother's wise behest.
3750. There stood he and shouted, and from afar Pallas Athene uttered her voice; but amid the Trojans he roused confusion unspeakable.
3751. Clear as the trumpet's voice when it soundeth aloud beneath the press of murderous foemen that beleaguer a city, so clear was then the voice of the son of Aeacus.
3752. And when they heard the brazen voice of the son of Aeacus the hearts of all were dismayed; and the fair - maned horses turned their cars backward, for their spirits boded bane.
3753. And the charioteers were stricken with terror when they beheld the unwearied fire blaze in fearsome wise above the head of the great-souled son of Peleus; for the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, made it blaze.
3754. Thrice over the trench shouted mightily the goodly Achilles, and thrice the Trojans and their famed allies were confounded.
3755. And there in that hour perished twelve men of their best amid their own chariots and their own spears.
3756. But the Achaeans with gladness drew Patroclus forth from out the darts and laid him on a bier, and his dear comrades thronged about him weeping; and amid them followed swift - footed Achilles, shedding hot tears, for that he beheld his trusty comrade lying on the bier, mangled by the sharp bronze.
3757. Him verily had he sent forth with horses and chariot into the war, but never again did he welcome his returning.
3758. Then was the unwearying sun sent by ox -eyed, queenly Hera to go his way, full loath, to the stream of Ocean.
3759. So the sun set and the goodly Achaeans stayed them from the fierce strife and the evil war.
3760. And on their side, the Trojans, when they were come back from the fierce conflict, loosed from beneath their cars their swift horses, and gathered themselves in assembly or ever they bethought them to sup.
3761. Upon their feet they stood while the gathering was held, neither had any man heart to sit; for they all were holden of fear, seeing Achilles was come forth, albeit he had long kept him aloof from grievous battle.
3762. Then among them wise Polydamas was first to speak, the son of Panthous; for he alone looked at once before and after.
3763. Comrade was he of Hector, and in the one night were they born: howbeit in speech was one far the best, the other with the spear.
3764. He with good intent addressed their gathering, and spake among them:
3765. On both sides, my friends, bethink you well.
3766. For my own part I bid you return even now to the city, neither on the plain beside the ships await bright Dawn, for afar from the wall are we.
3767. As long as this man continued in wrath against goodly Agamemnon, even so long were the Achaeans easier to fight against; aye, and I too was glad, when hard by the swift ships I spent the night, in hope that we should take the curved ships.
3768. But now do I wondrously fear the swift - footed son of Peleus; so masterful is his spirit, he will not be minded to abide in the plain, where in the midst both Trojans and Achaeans share in the fury of Ares; but it is for our city that he will fight, and for our wives.
3769. Nay, let us go to the city; hearken ye unto me, for on this wise shall it be.
3770. For this present hath immortal night stayed the swift - footed son of Peleus, but if on the morrow he shall come forth in harness and light on us yet abiding here, full well shall many a one come to know him; for with joy shall he that escapeth win to sacred Ilios, and many of the Trojans shall the dogs and vultures devour — far from my ear be the tale thereof.
3771. But and if we hearken to my words for all we be loath, this night shall we keep our forces in the place of gathering, and the city shall be guarded by the walls and high gates and by the tall well - polished doors that are set therein, bolted fast.
3772. But in the morning at the coming of Dawn arrayed in our armour will we make our stand upon the walls; and the worse will it be for him, if he be minded to come forth from the ships and fight with us to win the wall.
3773. Back again to his ships shall he hie him, when he hath given his horses, with high - arched necks, surfeit of coursing to and fro, as he driveth vainly beneath the city.
3774. But to force his way within will his heart not suffer him nor shall he lay it waste; ere that shall the swift dogs devour him.
3775. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake to him Hector of the flashing helm: Polydamas, this that thou sayest is no longer to my pleasure, seeing thou biddest us go back and be pent within the city.
3776. In good sooth have ye not yet had your fill of being pent within the walls?
3777. Of old all mortal men were wont to tell of Priam's city, for its wealth of gold, its wealth of bronze; but now are its goodly treasures perished from its homes, and lo, possessions full many have been sold away to Phrygia and lovely Maeonia, since great Zeus waxed wroth.
3778. But now, when the son of crooked - counselling Cronos hath vouchsafed me to win glory at the ships, and to pen the Achaeans, beside the sea, no longer, thou fool, do thou show forth counsels such as these among the folk.
3779. For not a man of the Trojans will hearken to thee; I will not suffer it.
3780. Nay, come; even as I shall bid, let us all obey: for this present take ye your supper throughout the host by companies, and take heed to keep watch, and be wakeful every man.
3781. And of the Trojans whoso is distressed beyond measure for his goods, let him gather them together and give them to the folk for them to feast thereon in common; better were it that they have profit thereof than the Achaeans.
3782. But in the morning, at the coming of Dawn, arrayed in our armour, let us arouse sharp battle at the hollow ships.
3783. But if in deed and in truth goodly Achilles is arisen by the ships, the worse shall it be for him, if he so will it.
3784. I verily will not flee from him out of dolorous war, but face to face will I stand against him, whether he shall win great victory, or haply I.
3785. Alike to all is the god of war, and lo, he slayeth him that would slay.
3786. So Hector addressed their gathering, and thereat the Trojans shouted aloud, fools that they were !
3787. for from them Pallas Athene took away their wits.
3788. To Hector they all gave praise in his ill advising, but Polydamas no man praised, albeit he devised counsel that was good.
3789. So then they took supper throughout the host; but the Achaeans the whole night through made moan in lamentation for Patroclus.
3790. And among them the son of Peleus began the vehement lamentation, laying his man-slaying hands upon the breast of his comrade and uttering many a groan, even as a bearded lion whose whelps some hunter of stags hath snatched away from out the thick wood; and the lion coming back thereafter grieveth sore, and through many a glen he rangeth on the track of the footsteps of the man, if so be he may anywhere find him; for anger exceeding grim layeth hold of him.
3791. Even so with heavy groaning spake Achilles among the Myrmidons:
3792. Out upon it !
3793. Vain in sooth was the word I uttered on that day, when I sought to hearten the warrior Menoetius in our halls; and said that when I had sacked Ilios I would bring back to him unto Opoeis his glorious son with the share of the spoil that should fall to his lot.
3794. But lo, Zeus fulfilleth not for men all their purposes; for both of us twain are fated to redden the selfsame earth with our blood here in the land of Troy; since neither shall I come back to be welcomed of the old knight Peleus in his halls, nor of my mother Thetis, but even here shall the earth hold me fast.
3795. But now, Patroclus, seeing I shall after thee pass beneath the earth, I will not give thee burial till I have brought hither the armour and the head of Hector, the slayer of thee, the great -souled; and of twelve glorious sons of the Trojans will I cut the throats before thy pyre in my wrath at thy slaying.
3796. Until then beside the beaked ships shalt thou lie, even as thou art, and round about thee shall deep- bosomed Trojan and Dardanian women make lament night and day with shedding of tears, even they that we twain got us through toil by our might and our long spears, when we wasted rich cities of mortal men.
3797. So saying, goodly Achilles bade his comrades set upon the fire a great cauldron, that with speed they might wash from Patroclus the bloody gore.
3798. And they set upon the blazing fire the cauldron for filling the bath, and poured in water, and took billets of wood and kindled them beneath it.
3799. Then the fire played about the belly of the cauldron, and the water grew warm.
3800. But when the water boiled in the bright bronze, then they washed him and anointed him richly with oil, filling his wounds with ointment of nine years old; and they laid him upon his bed, and covered him with a soft linen cloth from head to foot, and thereover with a white robe.
3801. So the whole night through around Achilles, swift of foot, the Myrmidons made moan in lamentation for Patroclus; but Zeus spake unto Hera, his sister and his wife:
3802. Thou hast then had thy way, O ox-eyed, queenly Hera; thou hast aroused Achilles, swift of foot.
3803. In good sooth must the long - haired Achaeans be children of thine own womb.
3804. Then made answer to him the ox-eyed, queenly Hera: Most dread son of Cronos, what a word hast thou said.
3805. Lo, even a man, I ween, is like to accomplish what he can for another man, one that is but mortal, and knoweth not all the wisdom that is mine.
3806. How then was I, that avow me to be highest of goddesses in twofold wise, for that I am eldest and am called thy wife, and thou art king among all the immortals — how was I not in my wrath against the Trojans to devise against them evil?
3807. On this wise spake they one to the other; but silver - footed Thetis came unto the house of Hephaestus, imperishable, decked with stars, preeminent among the houses of immortals, wrought all of bronze, that the crook - foot god himself had built him.
3808. Him she found sweating with toil as he moved to and fro about his bellows in eager haste; for he was fashioning tripods, twenty in all, to stand around the wall of his well - builded hall, and golden wheels had he set beneath the base of each that of themselves they might enter the gathering of the gods at his wish and again return to his house, a wonder to behold.
3809. Thus much were they fully wrought, that not yet were the cunningly fashioned ears set thereon; these was he making ready, and was forging the rivets.
3810. And while he laboured thereat with cunning skill, meanwhile there drew nigh to him the goddess, silver - footed Thetis.
3811. And Charis of the gleaming veil came forward and marked her — fair Charis, whom the famed god of the two strong arms had wedded.
3812. And she clasped her by the hand, and spake, and addressed her: Wherefore, long - robed Thetis, art thou come to our house, an honoured guest, and a welcome?
3813. Heretofore thou hast not been wont to come.
3814. But follow me further, that I may set before thee entertainment.
3815. So saying the bright goddess led her on.
3816. Then she made her to sit on a silver - studded chair, a beautiful chair, richly - wrought, and beneath was a footstool for the feet; and she called to Hephaestus, the famed craftsman, and spake to him, saying: Hephaestus, come forth hither;
3817. Thetis hath need of thee.
3818. And the famous god of the two strong arms answered her: Verily then a dread and honoured goddess is within my halls, even she that saved me when pain was come upon me after I had fallen afar through the will of my shameless mother, that was fain to hide me away by reason of my lameness.
3819. Then had I suffered woes in heart, had not Eurynome and Thetis received me into their bosom —
3820. Eurynome, daughter of backward - flowing Oceanus.
3821. With them then for nine years' space I forged much cunning handiwork, brooches, and spiral arm -bands, and rosettes and necklaces, within their hollow cave; and round about me flowed, murmuring with foam, the stream of Oceanus, a flood unspeakable.
3822. Neither did any other know thereof, either of gods or of mortal men, but Thetis knew and Eurynome, even they that saved me.
3823. And now is Thetis come to my house; wherefore it verily behoveth me to pay unto fair - tressed
3824. Thetis the full price for the saving of my life.
3825. But do thou set before her fair entertainment, while I put aside my bellows and all my tools.
3826. He spake, and from the anvil rose, a huge, panting bulk, halting the while, but beneath him his slender legs moved nimbly.
3827. The bellows he set away from the fire, and gathered all the tools wherewith he wrought into a silver chest; and with a sponge wiped he his face and his two hands withal, and his mighty neck and shaggy breast, and put upon him a tunic, and grasped a stout staff, and went forth halting; but there moved swiftly to support their lord handmaidens wrought of gold in the semblance of living maids.
3828. In them is understanding in their hearts, and in them speech and strength, and they know cunning handiwork by gift of the immortal gods.
3829. These busily moved to support their lord, and he, limping nigh to where Thetis was, sat him down upon a shining chair; and he clasped her by the hand, and spake, and addressed her: Wherefore, long - robed Thetis, art thou come to our house, an honoured guest and a welcome?
3830. Heretofore thou hast not been wont to come.
3831. Speak what is in thy mind; my heart bids me fulfill it, if fulfill it I can, and it is a thing that hath fulfillment.
3832. And Thetis made answer to him, shedding tears the while: Hephaestus, is there now any goddess, of all those that are in Olympus, that hath endured so many grievous woes in her heart as are the sorrows that Zeus, son of Cronos, hath given me beyond all others?
3833. Of all the daughters of the sea he subdued me alone to a mortal, even to Peleus, son of Aeacus, and I endured the bed of a mortal albeit sore against my will.
3834. And lo, he lieth in his halls fordone with grievous old age, but now other griefs are mine.
3835. A son he gave me to bear and to rear, pre-eminent among warriors, and he shot up like a sapling; then when I had reared him as a tree in a rich orchard plot, I sent him forth in the beaked ships to Ilios to war with the Trojans; but never again shall I welcome him back to his home, to the house of Peleus.
3836. And while yet he liveth, and beholdeth the light of the sun, he hath sorrow, nor can I any wise help him, though I go to him.
3837. The girl that the sons of the Achaeans chose out for him as a prize, her hath the lord Agamemnon taken back from out his arms.
3838. Verily in grief for her was he wasting his heart; but the Achaeans were the Trojans penning at the sterns of the ships, and would not suffer them to go forth.
3839. And to him the elders of the Argives made prayer, and named many glorious gifts.
3840. Then albeit he refused himself to ward from them ruin, yet clad he Patroclus in his own armour and sent him into the war, and added therewithal much people.
3841. All day long they fought around the Scaean gates, and on that selfsame day had laid the city waste, but that, after the valiant son of Menoetius had wrought sore harm, Apollo slew him amid the foremost fighters and gave glory to Hector.
3842. Therefore am I now come to thy knees, if so be thou wilt be minded to give my son, that is doomed to a speedy death, shield and helmet, and goodly greaves fitted with ankle-pieces, and corselet.
3843. For the harness that was his aforetime his trusty comrade lost, when he was slain by the Trojans; and my son lieth on the ground in anguish of heart.
3844. Then the famous god of the two strong arms answered her:
3845. Be of good cheer, neither let these things distress thy heart.
3846. Would that I might so surely avail to hide him afar from dolorous death, when dread fate cometh upon him, as verily goodly armour shall be his, such that in aftertime many a one among the multitude of men shall marvel, whosoever shall behold it.
3847. So saying he left her there and went unto his bellows, and he turned these toward the fire and bade them work.
3848. And the bellows, twenty in all, blew upon the melting - vats, sending forth a ready blast of every force, now to further him as he laboured hard, and again in whatsoever way Hephaestus might wish and his work go on.
3849. And on the fire he put stubborn bronze and tin and precious gold and silver; and thereafter he set on the anvil- block a great anvil, and took in one hand a massive hammer, and in the other took he the tongs.
3850. First fashioned he a shield, great and sturdy, adorning it cunningly in every part, and round about it set a bright rim, threefold and glittering, and therefrom made fast a silver baldric.
3851. Five were the layers of the shield itself; and on it he wrought many curious devices with cunning skill.
3852. Therein he wrought the earth, therein the heavens therein the sea, and the unwearied sun, and the moon at the full, and therein all the constellations wherewith heaven is crowned — the Pleiades, and the Hyades and the mighty Orion, and the Bear, that men call also the Wain, that circleth ever in her place, and watcheth Orion, and alone hath no part in the baths of Ocean.
3853. Therein fashioned he also two cities of mortal men exceeding fair.
3854. In the one there were marriages and feastings, and by the light of the blazing torches they were leading the brides from their bowers through the city, and loud rose the bridal song.
3855. And young men were whirling in the dance, and in their midst flutes and lyres sounded continually; and there the women stood each before her door and marvelled.
3856. But the folk were gathered in the place of assembly; for there a strife had arisen, and two men were striving about the blood - price of a man slain; the one avowed that he had paid all, declaring his cause to the people, but the other refused to accept aught; and each was fain to win the issue on the word of a daysman.
3857. Moreover, the folk were cheering both, shewing favour to this side and to that.
3858. And heralds held back the folk, and the elders were sitting upon polished stones in the sacred circle, holding in their hands the staves of the loud -voiced heralds.
3859. Therewith then would they spring up and give judgment, each in turn.
3860. And in the midst lay two talents of gold, to be given to him whoso among them should utter the most righteous judgment.
3861. But around the other city lay in leaguer two hosts of warriors gleaming in armour.
3862. And twofold plans found favour with them, either to lay waste the town or to divide in portions twain all the substance that the lovely city contained within.
3863. Howbeit the besieged would nowise hearken thereto, but were arming to meet the foe in an ambush.
3864. The wall were their dear wives and little children guarding, as they stood thereon, and therewithal the men that were holden of old age; but the rest were faring forth, led of Ares and Pallas Athene, both fashioned in gold, and of gold was the raiment wherewith they were clad.
3865. Goodly were they and tall in their harness, as beseemeth gods, clear to view amid the rest, and the folk at their feet were smaller.
3866. But when they were come to the place where it seemed good unto them to set their ambush, in a river - bed where was a watering - place for all herds alike, there they sate them down, clothed about with flaming bronze.
3867. Thereafter were two scouts set by them apart from the host, waiting till they should have sight of the sheep and sleek cattle.
3868. And these came presently, and two herdsmen followed with them playing upon pipes; and of the guile wist they not at all.
3869. But the liers - in- wait, when they saw these coming on, rushed forth against them and speedily cut off the herds of cattle and fair flocks of white - fleeced sheep, and slew the herdsmen withal.
3870. But the besiegers, as they sat before the places of gathering and heard much tumult among the kine, mounted forthwith behind their high - stepping horses, and set out thitherward, and speedily came upon them.
3871. Then set they their battle in array and fought beside the river banks, and were ever smiting one another with bronze- tipped spears.
3872. And amid them Strife and Tumult joined in the fray, and deadly Fate, grasping one man alive, fresh - wounded, another without a wound, and another she dragged dead through the mellay by the feet; and the raiment that she had about her shoulders was red with the blood of men.
3873. Even as living mortals joined they in the fray and fought; and they were haling away each the bodies of the others' slain.
3874. Therein he set also soft fallow - land, rich tilth and wide, that was three times ploughed; and ploughers full many therein were wheeling their yokes and driving them this way and that.
3875. And whensoever after turning they came to the headland of the field, then would a man come forth to each and give into his hands a cup of honey - sweet wine; and the ploughmen would turn them in the furrows, eager to reach the headland of the deep tilth.
3876. And the field grew black behind and seemed verily as it had been ploughed, for all that it was of gold; herein was the great marvel of the work.
3877. Therein he set also a king's demesne- land, wherein labourers were reaping, bearing sharp sickles in their hands.
3878. Some handfuls were falling in rows to the ground along the swathe, while others the binders of sheaves were binding with twisted ropes of straw.
3879. Three binders stood hard by them, while behind them boys would gather the handfuls, and bearing them in their arms would busily give them to the binders; and among them the king, staff in hand, was standing in silence at the swathe, joying in his heart.
3880. And heralds apart beneath an oak were making ready a feast, and were dressing a great ox they had slain for sacrifice; and the women sprinkled the flesh with white barley in abundance, for the workers' mid-day meal.
3881. Therein he set also a vineyard heavily laden with clusters, a vineyard fair and wrought of gold; black were the grapes, and the vines were set up throughout on silver poles.
3882. And around it he drave a trench of cyanus, and about that a fence of tin; and one single path led thereto, whereby the vintagers went and came, whensoever they gathered the vintage.
3883. And maidens and youths in childish glee were bearing the honey - sweet fruit in wicker baskets.
3884. And in their midst a boy made pleasant music with a clear - toned lyre, and thereto sang sweetly the Linos-song with his delicate voice; and his fellows beating the earth in unison therewith followed on with bounding feet mid dance and shoutings.
3885. And therein he wrought a herd of straight - horned kine: the kine were fashioned of gold and tin, and with lowing hasted they forth from byre to pasture beside the sounding river, beside the waving reed.
3886. And golden were the herdsmen that walked beside the kine, four in number, and nine dogs swift of foot followed after them.
3887. But two dread lions amid the foremost kine were holding a loud - lowing bull, and he, bellowing mightily, was haled of them, while after him pursued the dogs and young men.
3888. The lions twain had rent the hide of the great bull, and were devouring the inward parts and the black blood, while the herdsmen vainly sought to fright them, tarring on the swift hounds.
3889. Howbeit these shrank from fastening on the lions, but stood hard by and barked and sprang aside.
3890. Therein also the famed god of the two strong arms wrought a pasture in a fair dell, a great pasture of white - fleeced sheep, and folds, and roofed huts, and pens.
3891. Therein furthermore the famed god of the two strong arms cunningly wrought a dancing - floor like unto that which in wide Cnosus Daedalus fashioned of old for fair - tressed Ariadne.
3892. There were youths dancing and maidens of the price of many cattle, holding their hands upon the wrists one of the other.
3893. Of these the maidens were clad in fine linen, while the youths wore well - woven tunics faintly glistening with oil; and the maidens had fair chaplets, and the youths had daggers of gold hanging from silver baldrics.
3894. Now would they run round with cunning feet exceeding lightly, as when a potter sitteth by his wheel that is fitted between his hands and maketh trial of it whether it will run; and now again would they run in rows toward each other.
3895. And a great company stood around the lovely dance, taking joy therein; and two tumblers whirled up and down through the midst of them as leaders in the dance.
3896. Therein he set also the great might of the river Oceanus, around the uttermost rim of the strongly - wrought shield.
3897. But when he had wrought the shield, great and sturdy, then wrought he for him a corselet brighter than the blaze of fire, and he wrought for him a heavy helmet, fitted to his temples, a fair helm, richly - dight, and set thereon a crest of gold; and he wrought him greaves of pliant tin.
3898. But when the glorious god of the two strong arms had fashioned all the armour, he took and laid it before the mother of Achilles.
3899. And like a falcon she sprang down from snowy Olympus, bearing the flashing armour from Hephaestus.
3900. Now Dawn the saffron - robed arose from the streams of Oceanus to bring light to immortals and to mortal men, and Thetis came to the ships bearing gifts from the god.
3901. And she found her dear son as he lay, clasping Patroclus, and wailing aloud; and in throngs round about him his comrades were weeping.
3902. Then in the midst of them the bright goddess came to his side, and she clasped his hand, and spake and addressed him:
3903. My child, this man must we let be, for all our sorrow, to lie as he is, seeing he hath been slain once for all by the will of the gods.
3904. But receive thou from Hephaestus glorious armour, exceeding fair, such as never yet a man bare upon his shoulders.
3905. So saying the goddess set down the arms in front of Achilles, and they all rang aloud in their splendour.
3906. Then trembling seized all the Myrmidons, neither dared any man to look thereon, but they shrank in fear.
3907. Howbeit, when Achilles saw the arms, then came wrath upon him yet the more, and his eyes blazed forth in terrible wise from beneath their lids, as it had been flame; and he was glad as he held in his arms the glorious gifts of the god.
3908. But when in his soul he had taken delight in gazing on the glory of them, forthwith to his mother he spake winged words:
3909. My mother, the arms that the god hath given are such as the works of immortals should fitly be, such as no mortal man could fashion.
3910. Now therefore will I array me for battle; yet am I sore afraid lest meantime flies enter the wounds that the bronze hath dealt on the corpse of the valiant son of Menoetius, and breed worms therein, and work shame upon his corpse — for the life is slain out of him — and so all his flesh shall rot.
3911. Then the goddess, silver - footed Thetis, answered him:
3912. My child, let not these things distress thy heart.
3913. From him will I essay to ward off the savage tribes, the flies that feed upon men slain in battle.
3914. For even though he lie for the full course of a year, yet shall his flesh be sound continually, or better even than now it is.
3915. But do thou call to the place of gathering the Achaean warriors, and renounce thy wrath against Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, and then array thee with all speed for battle and clothe thee in thy might.
3916. So saying, she filled him with dauntless courage, and on Patroclus she shed ambrosia and ruddy nectar through his nostrils, that his flesh might be sound continually.
3917. But goodly Achilles strode along the shore of the sea, crying a terrible cry, and aroused the Achaean warriors.
3918. And even they that aforetime were wont to abide in the gathering of the ships — they that were pilots and wielded the steering - oars of the ships, or were stewards that dealt out food — even these came then to the place of gathering, because Achilles was come forth, albeit he had long kept him aloof from grievous war.
3919. Twain there were, squires of Ares, that came limping, even Tydeus' son, staunch in fight, and goodly Odysseus, leaning each on his spear, for their wounds were grievous still; and they went and sat them down in the front of the gathering.
3920. And last of all came the king of men, Agamemnon, burdened with his wound; for him too in the fierce conflict had Coon, Antenor's son, wounded with a thrust of his bronze - shod spear.
3921. But when all the Achaeans were gathered together, Achilles, swift of foot, arose among them and said: Son of Atreus, was this then the better for us twain, for thee and for me, what time with grief at heart we raged in soul -devouring strife for the sake of a girl?
3922. Would that amid the ships Artemis had slain her with an arrow on the day when I took her from out the spoil after I had laid waste Lyrnessus !
3923. Then had not so many Achaeans bitten the vast earth with their teeth beneath the hands of the foemen, by reason of the fierceness of my wrath.
3924. For Hector and the Trojans was this the better, but long shall the Achaeans, methinks, remember the strife betwixt me and thee.
3925. Howbeit, these things will we let be as past and done, for all our pain, curbing the heart in our breasts because we must.
3926. Now verily make I my wrath to cease: it beseemeth me not to be wroth for ever unrelentingly; but come, rouse thou speedily to battle the long - haired Achaeans, to the end that I may go forth against the Trojans and make trial of them yet again, whether they be fain to spend the night hard by the ships.
3927. Nay, many a one of them, methinks, will be glad to bend his knees in rest, whosoever shall escape from the fury of war, and from my spear.
3928. So spake he, and the well - greaved Achaeans waxed glad, for that the great-souled son of Peleus renounced his wrath.
3929. And among them spake the king of men, Agamemnon, even from the place where he sat, not standing forth in their midst:
3930. My friends, Danaan warriors, squires of Ares, meet is it to give ear to him that standeth to speak, nor is it seemly to break in upon his words; grievous were that even for one well - skilled.
3931. And amid the uproar of many how should a man either hear or speak?
3932. — hampered is he then, clear - voiced talker though he be.
3933. To the son of Peleus will I declare my mind, but do ye other Argives give heed, and mark well my words each man of you.
3934. Full often have the Achaeans spoken unto me this word, and were ever fain to chide me; howbeit it is not I that am at fault, but Zeus and Fate and Erinys, that walketh in darkness, seeing that in the midst of the place of gathering they cast upon my soul fierce blindness on that day, when of mine own arrogance I took from Achilles his prize.
3935. But what could I do?
3936. It is God that bringeth all things to their issue.
3937. Eldest daughter of Zeus is Ate that blindeth all — a power fraught with bane; delicate are her feet, for it is not upon the ground that she fareth, but she walketh over the heads of men, bringing men to harm, and this one or that she ensnareth.
3938. Aye, and on a time she blinded Zeus, albeit men say that he is the greatest among men and gods; yet even him Hera, that was but a woman, beguiled in her craftiness on the day when Alcmene in fair - crowned Thebe was to bring forth the mighty Heracles.
3939. Zeus verily spake vauntingly among all the gods: ‘ Hearken unto me, all ye gods and goddesses, that I may speak what the heart in my breast biddeth me.
3940. This day shall Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, bring to the light a man that shall be the lord of all them that dwell round about, even one of the race of those men who are of me by blood.’
3941. But with crafty mind the queenly Hera spake unto him: ‘
3942. Thou wilt play the cheat, and not bring thy word to fulfillment.
3943. Nay, come, Olympian, swear me now a mighty oath that in very truth that man shall be lord of all them that dwell round about, whoso this day shall fall between a woman's feet, even one of those men who are of the blood of thy stock.’
3944. So spake she; howbeit Zeus in no wise marked her craftiness, but sware a great oath, and therewithal was blinded sore.
3945. But Hera darted down and left the peak of Olympus, and swiftly came to Achaean Argos, where she knew was the stately wife of Sthenelus, son of Perseus, that bare a son in her womb, and lo, the seventh month was come.
3946. This child Hera brought forth to the light even before the full tale of the months, but stayed Alcmene's bearing, and held back the Eileithyiae.
3947. And herself spake to Zeus, son of Cronos, to bear him word: ‘ Father Zeus, lord of the bright lightning, a word will I speak for thy heeding.
3948. Lo, even now, is born a valiant man that shall be lord over the Argives, even Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, the son of Perseus, of thine own lineage; not unmeet is it that he be lord over the Argives.’
3949. So spake she, and sharp pain smote him in the deep of his heart, and forthwith he seized
3950. Ate by her bright - tressed head, wroth in his soul, and sware a mighty oath that never again unto Olympus and the starry heaven should Ate come, she that blindeth all.
3951. So said he, and whirling her in his hand flung her from the starry heaven, and quickly she came to the tilled fields of men.
3952. At thought of her would he ever groan, whenso he beheld his dear son in unseemly travail beneath Eurystheus' tasks.
3953. Even so I also, what time great Hector of the flashing helm was making havoc of the Argives at the sterns of the ships, could not forget Ate, of whom at the first I was made blind.
3954. Howbeit seeing I was blinded, and Zeus robbed me of my wits, fain am I to make amends and to give requital past counting.
3955. Nay, rouse thee for battle, and rouse withal the rest of thy people.
3956. Gifts am I here ready to offer thee, even all that goodly Odysseus promised thee yesternight, when he had come to thy hut.
3957. Or, if thou wilt, abide a while, eager though thou be for war, and the gifts shall squires take and bring thee from my ship, to the end that thou mayest see that I will give what will satisfy thy heart.
3958. Then swift - footed Achilles answered him, and said:
3959. Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, for the gifts, to give them if thou wilt, as is but seemly, or to withhold them, rests with thee.
3960. But now let us bethink us of battle with all speed; it beseemeth not to dally here in talk, neither to make delay, for yet is a great work undone — to the end that many a one may again behold Achilles amid the foremost laying waste with his spear of bronze the battalions of the men of Troy.
3961. Thereon let each one of you take thought as he fighteth with his man.
3962. Then Odysseus of many wiles answered him and said: Nay, valiant though thou art, godlike Achilles, urge not on this wise the sons of the Achaeans to go fasting against Ilios to do battle with the men of Troy, since not for a short space shall the battle last when once the ranks of men are met and the god breathes might into either host.
3963. But bid thou the Achaeans by their swift ships to taste of food and wine; since therein is courage and strength.
3964. For there is no man that shall be able the whole day long until set of sun to fight against the foe, fasting the while from food; for though in his heart he be eager for battle, yet his limbs wax heavy unawares and thirst cometh upon him and hunger withal, and his knees grow weary as he goeth.
3965. But whoso, having had his fill of wine and food, fighteth the whole day long against the foemen, lo, his heart within him is of good cheer, and his limbs wax not weary until all withdraw them from battle.
3966. Come then, dismiss thou the host, and bid them make ready their meal.
3967. And as touching the gifts, let Agamemnon, king of men, bring them forth into the midst of the place of gathering, that all the Achaeans may behold them with their eyes, and thou be made glad at heart.
3968. And let him rise up in the midst of the Argives and swear to thee an oath, that never hath he gone up into the woman's bed neither had dalliance with her, as is the appointed way, O king, of men and of women; and let the heart in thine own breast be open to appeasement.
3969. Thereafter let him make amends to thee in his hut with a feast full rich, that thou mayest have nothing lacking of thy due.
3970. Son of Atreus, towards others also shalt thou be more righteous hereafter; for in no wise is it blame for a king to make amends to another, if so be he wax wroth without a cause.
3971. To him then spake again the king of men, Agamemnon: Glad am I, son of Laertes, to hear thy words, for duly hast thou set forth the whole matter, an told the tale thereof.
3972. This oath am I ready to swear, and my heart biddeth me thereto, nor shall I forswear myself before the god.
3973. But let Achilles abide here the while, eager though he be for war, and abide all ye others together, until the gifts be brought from my hut, and we make oaths of faith with sacrifice.
3974. And to thine own self do I thus give charge and commandment:
3975. Choose thee young men, princes of the host of the Achaeans, and bear from my ship the gifts even all that we promised yesternight to give Achilles, and bring the women withal.
3976. And let Talthybius forthwith make me ready a boar in the midst of the wide camp of the Achaeans, to sacrifice to Zeus and to the Sun.
3977. But swift - footed Achilles answered him, and said:
3978. Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, at some other time were it e'en better that ye be busied thus, when haply there shall come between some pause in war, and the fury in my breast be not so great.
3979. Now are they lying mangled, they that Hector, son of Priam, slew, Zeus vouch - safed him glory, and ye twain are bidding us to meat !
3980. Verily for mine own part would I even now bid the sons of the Achaeans do battle fasting and unfed, and at set of sun make them ready a mighty meal, when we shall have avenged the shame.
3981. Till that shall be, down my throat, at least, neither drink nor food shall pass, seeing my comrade is dead, who in my hut lieth mangled by the sharp bronze, his feet turned toward the door, while round about him our comrades mourn; wherefore it is nowise on these things that my heart is set, but on slaying, and blood, and the grievous groanings of men.
3982. Then Odysseus of many wiles answered him, and said: O Achilles, son of Peleus, far the mightiest of the Achaeans, better art thou than I and mightier not a little with the spear, howbeit in counsel might I surpass thee by far, seeing I am the elder - born and know the more; wherefore let thine heart endure to hearken to my words.
3983. Quickly have men surfeit of battle, wherein the bronze streweth most straw upon the ground, albeit the harvest is scantiest, whenso Zeus inclineth his balance, he that is for men the dispenser of battle.
3984. But with the belly may it nowise be that the Achaeans should mourn a corpse, for full many are ever falling one after another day by day; when then could one find respite from toil?
3985. Nay, it behoveth to bury him that is slain, steeling our hearts and weeping but the one day's space; but all they that are left alive from hateful war must needs bethink them of drink and of food, to the end that yet the more we may fight with the foemen ever incessantly, clothed about with stubborn bronze.
3986. And let no man of all the host hold back awaiting other summons beside, for the summons is this: Ill shall it be for him whoso is left at the ships of the Argives.
3987. Nay, setting out in one throng let us rouse keen battle against the horse - taming Trojans.
3988. He spake, and took to him the sons of glorious Nestor, and Meges, son of Phyleus, and Thoas and Meriones and Lycomedes, son of Creon, and Melanippus; and they went their way to the hut of Agamemnon, son of Atreus.
3989. Then straightway in the one moment was the word said, and the deed fulfilled.
3990. Seven tripods bare they from the hut, even as he promised him, and twenty gleaming cauldrons and twelve horses; and forth they speedily led women skilled in goodly handiwork; seven they were, and the eighth was fair - cheeked Briseis.
3991. Then Odysseus weighed out ten talents of gold in all, and led the way and with him the other youths of the Achaeans bare the gifts.
3992. These then they set in the midst of the place of gathering, and Agamemnon rose up, and Talthybius, whose voice was like a god's, took his stand by the side of the shepherd of the people, holding a boar in his hands.
3993. And the son of Atreus drew forth with his hand the knife that ever hung beside the great sheath of his sword, and cut the firstling hairs from the boar, and lifting up his hands made prayer to Zeus; and all the Argives sat thereby in silence, hearkening as was meet unto the king.
3994. And he spake in prayer, with a look up to the wide heaven:
3995. Be Zeus my witness first, highest and best of gods, and Earth and Sun, and the Erinyes, that under earth take vengeance on men, whosoever hath sworn a false oath, that never laid I hand upon the girl Briseis either by way of a lover's embrace or anywise else, but she ever abode untouched in my huts.
3996. And if aught of this oath be false, may the gods give me woes full many, even all that they are wont to give to him whoso sinneth against them in his swearing.
3997. He spake, and cut the boar's throat with the pitiless bronze, and the body Talthybius whirled and flung into the great gulf of the grey sea, to be food for the fishes; but Achilles uprose, and spake among the war-loving Argives: Father Zeus, great in good sooth is the blindness thou sendest upon men.
3998. Never would the son of Atreus have utterly roused the wrath within my breast, nor led off the girl ruthlessly in my despite, but mayhap it was the good pleasure of Zeus that on many of the Achaeans death should come.
3999. But now go ye to your meal, that we may join in battle.
4000. So spake he, and hastily brake up the gathering.
4001. Then the others scattered, each to his own ship, but the great-hearted Myrmidons busied themselves about the gifts, and bare them forth to the ship of godlike Achilles.
4002. And they bestowed them in the huts, and set the women there, and the horses proud squires drave off to the herd.
4003. But Briseis, that was like unto golden Aphrodite, when she had sight of Patroclus mangled with the sharp bronze, flung herself about him and shrieked aloud, and with her hands she tore her breast and tender neck and beautiful face.
4004. And amid her wailing spake the woman like unto the goddesses: Patroclus, dearest to my hapless heart, alive I left thee when I went from the hut, and now I find thee dead, thou leader of hosts, as I return thereto: thus for me doth evil ever follow hard on evil.
4005. My husband, unto whom my father and queenly mother gave me, I beheld mangled with the sharp bronze before our city, and my three brethren whom mine own mother bare, brethren beloved, all these met their day of doom.
4006. But thou, when swift Achilles slew my husband, and laid waste the city of godlike Mynes, wouldst not even suffer me to weep, but saidest that thou wouldst make me the wedded wife of Achilles, and that he would bear me in his ships to Phthia, and make me a marriage - feast among the Myrmidons.
4007. Wherefore I wail for thee in thy death and know no ceasing, for thou wast ever kind.
4008. So spake she wailing, and thereto the women added their laments;
4009. Patroclus indeed they mourned, but therewithal each one her own sorrows.
4010. But around Achilles gathered the elders of the Achaeans, beseeching him that he would eat; but he refused them, moaning the while: I beseech you, if any of my dear comrades will hearken unto me, bid me not before the time sate my heart with food or drink, seeing dread grief is come upon me.
4011. Till set of sun will I abide, and endure even as I am.
4012. So spake he, and sent from him the other chieftains, but the two sons of Atreus abode, and goodly Odysseus, and Nestor and Idomeneus and the old man Phoenix, driver of chariots, seeking to comfort him in his exceeding sorrow; but no whit would his heart be comforted until he entered the mouth of bloody war.
4013. And as he thought thereon he heaved a heavy sigh and spake, saying:
4014. Ah verily of old, thou too, O hapless one, dearest of my comrades, thyself wast wont to set forth in our hut with nimble haste a savoury meal, whenso the Achaeans made haste to bring tearful war against the horse - taming Trojans.
4015. But now thou liest here mangled, and my heart will have naught of meat and drink, though they be here at hand, through yearning for thee.
4016. Naught more grievous than this could I suffer, not though I should hear of the death of mine own father, who now haply in Phthia is shedding round tears for lack of a son like me, while I in a land of alien folk for the sake of abhorred Helen am warring with the men of Troy; nay, nor though it were he that in Scyrus is reared for me, my son well - beloved — if so be godlike Neoptolemus still liveth.
4017. For until now the heart in my breast had hope that I alone should perish far from horse - pasturing Argos, here in the land of Troy, but that thou shouldest return to Phthia, that so thou mightest take my child in thy swift, black ship from Scyrus, and show him all things — my possessions, my slaves, and my great high - roofed house.
4018. For by now I ween is Peleus either dead and gone, or else, though haply he still liveth feebly, is sore distressed with hateful old age, and with waiting ever for woeful tidings of me, when he shall hear that I am dead.
4019. So spake he weeping, and thereto the elders added their laments, bethinking them each one of what he had left at home.
4020. And as they mourned the son of Cronos had sight of them, and was touched with pity; and forthwith he spake winged words unto Athene:
4021. My child, lo thou forsakest utterly thine own warrior.
4022. Is there then no place in thy thought any more for Achilles?
4023. Yonder he sitteth in front of his ships with upright horns, mourning for his dear comrade; the others verily are gone to their meal but he fasteth and will have naught of food.
4024. Nay go, shed thou into his breast nectar and pleasant ambrosia, that hunger - pangs come not upon him.
4025. So saying he urged on Athene, that was already eager: and she like a falcon, wide of wing and shrill of voice, leapt down upon him from out of heaven through the air.
4026. Then while the Achaeans were arraying them speedily for battle throughout the camp, into the breast of Achilles she shed nectar and pleasant ambrosia that grievous hunger - pangs should not come upon his limbs; and then herself was gone to the stout - builded house of her mighty sire, and the Achaeans poured forth from the swift ships.
4027. As when thick and fast the snowflakes flutter down from Zeus chill beneath the blast of the North Wind, born in the bright heaven; even so then thick and fast from the ships were borne the helms, bright - gleaming, and the bossed shields, the corselets with massive plates, and the ashen spears.
4028. And the gleam thereof went up to heaven, and all the earth round about laughed by reason of the flashing of bronze; and there went up a din from beneath the feet of men; and in their midst goodly Achilles arrayed him for battle.
4029. There was a gnashing of his teeth, and his two eyes blazed as it had been a flame of fire, and into his heart there entered grief that might not be borne.
4030. Thus in fierce wrath against the Trojans he clad him in the gifts of the god, that Hephaestus had wrought for him with toil.
4031. The greaves first he set about his legs: beautiful they were, and fitted with silver ankle-pieces, and next he did on the corselet about his chest.
4032. And about his shoulders he cast the silver - studded sword of bronze, and thereafter grasped the shield great and sturdy, wherefrom went forth afar a gleam as of the moon.
4033. And as when forth ower the sea there appeareth to seamen the gleam of blazing fire, and it burneth high up in the mountains in a lonely steading — but sore against their will the storm - winds bear them over the teeming deep afar from their friends; even so from the shield of Achilles went up a gleam to heaven, from that shield fair and richly - dight.
4034. And he lifted the mighty helm and set it upon his head; and it shone as it were a star — the helm with crest of horse - hair, and around it waved the plumes of gold, that Hephaestus had set thick about the crest.
4035. And goodly Achilles made proof of himself in his armour, whether it fitted him, and his glorious limbs moved free; and it became as it were wings to him, and lifted up the shepherd of the people.
4036. And forth from its stand he drew his father's spear, heavy and huge and strong, that none other of the Achaeans could wield, but Achilles alone was skilled to wield it, even the Pelian spear of ash that Cheiron had given to his dear father from the peak of Pelion, to be for the slaying of warriors.
4037. And Automedon and Alcinous set them busily to yoke the horses, and about them they set the fair breast-straps, and cast bits within their jaws, and drew the reins behind to the jointed car.
4038. And Automedon grasped in his hand the bright lash, that fitted it well, and leapt upon the car; and behind him stepped Achilles harnessed for fight, gleaming in his armour like the bright Hyperion.
4039. Then terribly he called aloud to the horses of his father: Xanthus and Balius, ye far - famed children of Podarge, in some other wise bethink you to bring your charioteer back safe to the host of the Danaans, when we have had our fill of war, and leave ye not him there dead, as ye did Patroclus.
4040. Then from beneath the yoke spake to him the horse Xanthus, of the swift - glancing feet; on a sudden he bowed his head, and all his mane streamed from beneath the yoke - pad beside the yoke, and touched the ground; and the goddess, white - armed Hera, gave him speech:
4041. Aye verily, yet for this time will we save thee, mighty Achilles, albeit the day of doom is nigh thee, nor shall we be the cause thereof, but a mighty god and overpowering Fate.
4042. For it was not through sloth or slackness of ours that the Trojans availed to strip the harness from the shoulders of Patroclus, but one, far the best of gods, even he that fair - haired Leto bare, slew him amid the foremost fighters and gave glory to Hector.
4043. But for us twain, we could run swift as the blast of the West Wind, which, men say, is of all winds the fleetest; nay, it is thine own self that art fated to be slain in fight by a god and a mortal.
4044. When he had thus spoken, the Erinyes checked his voice.
4045. Then, his heart mightily stirred, spake to him swift - footed Achilles: Xanthus, why dost thou prophesy my death?
4046. Thou needest not at all.
4047. Well know I even of myself that it is my fate to perish here, far from my father dear, and my mother; howbeit even so will I not cease, until I have driven the Trojans to surfeit of war.
4048. He spake, and with a cry drave amid the foremost his single - hooved horses.
4049. So by the beaked ships around thee, O son of Peleus, insatiate of fight, the Achaeans arrayed them for battle; and likewise the Trojans over against them on the rising ground of the plain.
4050. But Zeus bade Themis summon the gods to the place of gathering from the brow of many- ribbed Olympus; and she sped everywhither, and bade them come to the house of Zeus.
4051. There was no river that came not, save only Oceanus, nor any nymph, of all that haunt the fair copses, the springs that feed the rivers, and the grassy meadows.
4052. And being come to the house of Zeus they sate them down within the polished colonnades which for father Zeus Hephaestus had builded with cunning skill.
4053. Thus were they gathered within the house of Zeus; nor did the Shaker of Earth fail to heed the call of the goddess, but came forth from the sea to join their company; and he sate him in the midst, and made question concerning the purpose of Zeus: Wherefore, thou lord of the bright lightning, hast thou called the gods to the place of gathering?
4054. Is it that thou art pondering on somewhat concerning the Trojans and Achaeans?
4055. for now is their battle and fighting kindled hard at hand.
4056. Then Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, answered him, and said:
4057. Thou knowest, O Shaker of Earth, the purpose in my breast, for the which I gathered you hither; I have regard unto them, even though they die.
4058. Yet verily, for myself will I abide here sitting in a fold of Olympus, wherefrom I will gaze and make glad my heart; but do ye others all go forth till ye be come among the Trojans and Achaeans, and bear aid to this side or that, even as the mind of each may be.
4059. For if Achilles shall fight alone against the Trojans, not even for a little space will they hold back the swift - footed son of Peleus.
4060. Nay, even aforetime were they wont to tremble as they looked upon him, and now when verily his heart is grievously in wrath for his friend, I fear me lest even beyond what is ordained he lay waste the wall.
4061. So spake the son of Cronos, and roused war unabating.
4062. And the gods went their way into the battle, being divided in counsel:
4063. Hera gat her to the gathering of the ships, and with her Pallas Athene, and Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, and the helper Hermes, that was beyond all in the cunning of his mind; and together with these went Hephaestus, exulting in his might, halting, but beneath him his slender legs moved nimbly; but unto the Trojans went Ares, of the flashing helm, and with him Phoebus, of the unshorn locks, and Artemis, the archer, and Leto and Xanthus and laughter - loving Aphrodite.
4064. Now as long as the gods were afar from the mortal men, even for so long triumphed the Achaeans mightily, seeing Achilles was come forth, albeit he had long kept him aloof from grievous battle; but upon the Trojans came dread trembling on the limbs of every man in their terror, when they beheld the swift - footed son of Peleus, flaming in his harness, the peer of Ares, the bane of men.
4065. But when the Olympians were come into the midst of the throng of men, then up leapt mighty Strife, the rouser of hosts, and Athene cried a1oud, — now would she stand beside the digged trench without the wall, and now upon the loud - sounding shores would she utter her loud cry.
4066. And over against her shouted Ares, dread as a dark whirlwind, calling with shrill tones to the Trojans from the topmost citadel, and now again as he sped by the shore of Simois over Callicolone.
4067. Thus did the blessed gods urge on the two hosts to clash in battle, and amid them made grievous strife to burst forth.
4068. Then terribly thundered the father of gods and men from on high; and from beneath did Poseidon cause the vast earth to quake, and the steep crests of the mountains.
4069. All the roots of many - fountained Ida were shaken, and all her peaks, and the city of the Trojans, and the ships of the Achaeans.
4070. And seized with fear in the world below was Aidoneus, lord of the shades, and in fear leapt he from his throne and cried aloud, lest above him the earth be cloven by Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, and his abode be made plain to view for mortals and immortals - the dread and dank abode, wherefor the very gods have loathing: so great was the din that arose when the gods clashed in strife.
4071. For against king Poseidon stood Phoebus Apollo with his winged arrows, and against Enyalius the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene; against Hera stood forth the huntress of the golden arrows, and the echoing chase, even the archer Artemis, sister of the god that smiteth afar; against Leto stood forth the strong helper, Hermes, and against Hephaestus the great, deep - eddying river, that god called Xanthus, and men Scamander.
4072. Thus gods went forth to meet with gods.
4073. But Achilles was fain to meet with Hector, Priam's son, above all others in the throng, for with his blood as with that of none other did his spirit bid him glut Ares, the warrior with tough shield of hide.
4074. Howbeit Aeneas did Apollo, rouser of hosts, make to go forth to face the son of Peleus, and he put into him great might: and he likened his own voice to that of Lycaon, son of Priam.
4075. In his likeness spake unto Aeneas the son of Zeus, Apollo: Aeneas, counsellor of the Trojans, where be now thy threats, wherewith thou wast wont to declare unto the princes of the Trojans over thy wine, that thou wouldst do battle man to man against Achilles, son of Peleus?
4076. Then Aeneas answered him, and said: Son of Priam, why on this wise do thou bid me face in fight the son of Peleus, high of heart, though I be not minded thereto?
4077. Not now for the first time shall I stand forth against swift - footed Achilles; nay, once ere now he drave me with his spear from Ida, when he had come forth against our kine, and laid Lyrnessus waste and Pedasus withal; howbeit Zeus saved me, who roused my strength and made swift my knees.
4078. Else had I been slain beneath the hands of Achilles and of Athene, who ever went before him and set there a light of deliverance, and bade him slay Leleges and Trojans with spear of bronze.
4079. Wherefore may it not be that any man face Achilles in fight, for that ever by his side is some god, that wardeth from him ruin.
4080. Aye, and of itself his spear flieth straight, and ceaseth not till it have pierced through the flesh of man.
4081. Howbeit were a god to stretch with even hand the issue of war, then not lightly should he vanquish me, nay, not though he vaunt him to be wholly wrought of bronze.
4082. Then in answer to him spake the prince Apollo, son of Zeus: Nay, warrior, come, pray thou also to the gods that are for ever; for of thee too men say that thou wast born of Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus, while he is sprung from a lesser goddess.
4083. For thy mother is daughter of Zeus, and his of the old man of the sea.
4084. Nay, bear thou straight against him thy stubborn bronze, nor let him anywise turn thee back with words of contempt and with threatenings.
4085. So saying he breathed great might into the shepherd of the host, and he strode amid the foremost fighters, harnessed in flaming bronze.
4086. Nor was the son of Anchises unseen of white - armed Hera, as he went forth to face the son of Peleus amid the throng of men, but she gathered the gods together, and spake among them, saying:
4087. Consider within your hearts, ye twain, O Poseidon and Athene, how these things are to be.
4088. Lo, here is Aeneas, gone forth, harnessed in flaming bronze, to face the son of Peleus, and it is Phoebus Apollo that hath set him on.
4089. Come ye then, let us turn him back forthwith; or else thereafter let one of us stand likewise by Achilles' side, and give him great might, and suffer not the heart in his breast anywise to fail; to the end that he may know that they that love him are the best of the immortals, and those are worthless as wind, that hitherto have warded from thie Trojans war and battle.
4090. All we are come down from Olympus to mingle in this battle, that Achilles take no hurt among the Trojans for this days' space; but thereafter shall he suffer whatever Fate spun for him with her thread at his birth, when his mother bare him.
4091. But if Achilles learn not this from some voice of the gods, he shall have dread hereafter when some god shall come against him in battle; for hard are the gods to look upon when they appear in manifest presence.
4092. Then Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, answered her: Hera, be not thou wroth beyond what is wise; thou needest not at all.
4093. I verily were not fain to make gods chash with gods in strife.
4094. Nay, for our part let us rather go apart from the track unto some place of outlook, and sit us there, and war shall be for men.
4095. But if so be Ares or Phoebus Apollo shall make beginning of fight, or shall keep Achilles in check and suffer him not to do battle, then forthwith from us likewise shall the strife of war arise; and right soon, methinks, shall they separate them from the battle and hie them back to Olympus, to the gathering of the other gods, vanquished beneath our hands perforce.
4096. So saying, the dark - haired god led the way to the heaped - up wall of godlike Heracles, the high wall that the Trojans and Pallas Athene had builded for him, to the end that he might flee thither and escape from the monster of the deep, whenso the monster drave him from the seashore to the plain.
4097. There Poseidon and the other gods sate them down, and clothed their shoulders round about with a cloud that might not be rent; and they of the other part sat over against them on the brows of Callicolone, round about thee, O archer Phoebus, and Ares, sacker of cities.
4098. So sat they on either side devising counsels, but to make beginning of grievous war both sides were loath, albeit Zeus, that sitteth on high, had bidden them.
4099. Howbeit the whole plain was filled with men and horses, and aflame with bronze, and the earth resounded beneath their feet as they rushed together; and two warriors best by far of all came one against the other into the space between the two hosts, eager to do battle, even Aeneas, Anchises' son, and goodly Achilles.
4100. Aeneas first strode forth with threatening mien, his heavy hem nodding above him; his valorous shield he held before his breast, and he brandished a spear of bronze.
4101. And on the other side the son of Peleus rushed against him him like a lion, a ravening lion that men are fain to slay, even a whole folk that be gathered together; and he at the first recking naught of them goeth his way, but when one of the youths swift in battle hath smitten him with a spear-cast, then he gathereth himself open-mouthed, and foam cometh forth about his teeth, and in his heart his valiant spirit groaneth, and with his tail he lasheth his ribs and his flanks on this side and on that, and rouseth himself to fight, and with glaring eyes he rusheth straight on in his fury, whether he slay some man or himself be slain in the foremost throng; even so was Achilles driven by his fury, and his lordly spirit to go forth to face great-hearted Aeneas.
4102. And when they were come near, as they advanced one against the other, then first unto Aeneas spake swift - footed goodly Achilles: Aeneas, wherefore hast thou sallied thus far forth from the throng to stand and face me?
4103. Is it that thy heart biddeth thee fight with me in hope that thou shalt be master of Priam's sovreignty amid the horse - taming Trojans?
4104. Nay, but though thou slayest me, not for that shall Priam place his kingship in thy hands, for he hath sons, and withal is sound and nowise flighty of mind.
4105. Or have the Trojans meted out for thee a demesne pre-eminent above all, a fair tract of orchard and of plough - land, that thou mayest possess it, if so be thou slayest me?
4106. Hard, methinks, wilt thou find that deed.
4107. Aye, for on another day ere now methinks I drave thee before my, spear.
4108. Dost thou not remember when thou wast alone and I made thee run from the kine down with swift steps from Ida's hills in headlong haste?
4109. On that day didst thou not once look behind thee in thy flight.
4110. Thence thou fleddest forth to Lyrnessus, but I laid it waste, assailing it with the aid of Athene and father Zeus, and the women I led captive and took from them the day of freedom; but thyself thou wast saved by Zeus and the other gods.
4111. Howbeit not this day, methinks, shall he save thee, as thou deemest in thy heart; nay, of myself I bid thee get thee back into the throng and stand not forth to face me, ere yet some evil befall thee; when it is wrought even a fool getteth understanding.
4112. Then Aeneas answered him and said: Son of Peleus, think not with words to afright me, as I were a child, seeing I know well of myself to utter taunts and withal speech that is seemly.
4113. We know each other's lineage, and each other's parents, for we have heard the tales told in olden days by mortal men; but with sight of eyes hast thou never seen my parents nor I thine.
4114. Men say that thou art son of peerless Peleus, and that thy mother was fair - tressed Thetis, a daughter of the sea; but for me, I declare thiat I am son of great-hearted Anchises, and my mother is Aphrodite.
4115. Of these shall one pair or the other mourn a dear son this day; for verily not with childish words, I deem, shall we twain thus part one from the other and return from out the battle.
4116. Howbeit, if thou wilt, hear this also, that thou mayest know well my lineage, and many there be that know it: at the first Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, begat Dardanus, and he founded Dardania, for not yet was sacred Ilios builded in the plain to be a city of mortal men, but they still dwelt upon the slopes of many - fountained Ida.
4117. And Dardanus in turn begat a son, king Erichthonius, who became richest of mortal men.
4118. Three thousand steeds had he that pastured in the marsh - land; mares were they.
4119. rejoicing in their tender foals.
4120. Of these as they grazed the North Wind became enamoured, and he likened himself to a dark - maned stallion and covered them; and they conceived, and bare twelve fillies
4121. These, when they bounded over the earth, the giver of grain, would course over the topmost ears of ripened corn and break them not, and whenso they bounded over the broad back of the sea, would course over the topmost breakers of the hoary brine.
4122. And Erichthonius begat Tros to be king among the Trojans, and from Tros again three peerless sons were born, Ilus, and Assaracus, and godlike Ganymedes that was born the fairest of mortal men; wherefore the gods caught him up on high to be cupbearer to Zeus by reason of his beauty, that he might dwell with the immortals.
4123. And Ilus again begat a son, peerless Laomedon, and Laomedon begat Tithonus and Priam and Clytius, and Hicetaon, scion of Ares.
4124. And Assaracus begat Capys, and he Anchises; but Anchises begat me and Priam goodly Hector.
4125. This then is the lineage amid the blood wherefrom I avow me sprung.
4126. But as for valour, it is Zeus that increaseth it for men or minisheth it, even as himself willeth, seeing he is mightiest of all.
4127. But come, no longer let us talk thus like children, as we twain stand in the midst of the strife of battle.
4128. Revilings are there for both of us to utter, revilings full many; a ship of an hundred benches would not bear the load thereof.
4129. Glib is the tongue of mortals, and words there be therein many and manifold, and of speech the range is wide on this side and on that.
4130. Whatsoever word thou speakest, such shalt thou also hear.
4131. But what need have we twain to bandy strifes and wranglings one with the other like women, that when they have waxed wroth in soul -devouring strife go forth into the midst of the street and wrangle one against the other with words true and false; for even these wrath biddeth them speak.
4132. But from battle, seeing I am eager therefor, shalt thou not by words turn me till we have fought with the bronze man to man; nay, come, let us forthwith make trial each of the other with bronze-tipped spears.
4133. He spake, and let drive his mighty spear against the other's dread and wondrous shield, and loud rang the shield about the spear-point.
4134. And the son of Peleus held the shield from him with his stout hand, being seized with dread; for he deemed that the far-shadowing spear of great-hearted Aeneas would lightly pierce it through — fool that he was, nor knew in his mind and heart that not easy are the glorious gifts of the gods for mortal men to master or that they give place withal.
4135. Nor did the mighty spear of wise - hearted Aeneas then break through the shield, for the gold stayed it, the gift of the god.
4136. Howbeit through two folds he drave it, yet were there still three, for five layers had the crook - foot god welded, two of bronze, and two within of tin, and one of gold, in which the spear of ash was stayed.
4137. Then Achilles in his turn hurled his far-shadowing spear and smote upon Aeneas' shield that was well - balanced upon every side, beneath the outermost rim where the bronze ran thinnest, and thinnest was the backing of bull's -hide; and straight through sped the spear of Pelian ash, and the shield rang beneath the blow.
4138. And Aeneas cringed and held from him the shield, being seized with fear; and the spear passed over his back and was stayed in the ground for all its fury, albeit it tore asunder two circles of the sheltering shield.
4139. And having escaped the long spear he stood up, and over his eyes measureless grief was shed, and fear came over him for that the spear was planted so nigh.
4140. But Achilles drew his sharp sword and leapt upon him furiously, crying a terrible cry; and Aeneas grasped in his hand a stone — a mighty deed — one that not two mortals could bear, such as men are now; yet lightly did he wield it even alone.
4141. Then would Aeneas have smitten him with the stone, as he rushed upon him, either on helm or on the shield that had warded from him woeful destruction, and the son of Peleus in close combat would with his sword have robbed Aeneas of life, had not Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, been quick to see.
4142. And forthwith he spake among the immortal gods, saying:
4143. Now look you, verily have I grief for great-hearted Aeneas, who anon shall go down to the house of Hades, slain by the son of Peleus, for that he listened to the bidding of Apollo that smiteth afar — fool that he was !
4144. nor will the god in any wise ward from him woeful destruction.
4145. But wherefore should he, a guiltless man, suffer woes vainly by reason of sorrows that are not his own? —
4146. whereas he ever giveth acceptable gifts to the gods that hold broad heaven.
4147. Nay, come, let us head him forth from out of death, lest the son of Cronos be anywise wroth, if so be Achilles slay him; for it is ordained unto him to escape, that the race of Dardanus perish not without seed and be seen no more — of Dardanus whom the son of Cronos loved above all the children born to him from mortal women.
4148. For at length hath the son of Cronos come to hate the race of Priam; and now verily shall the mighty Aeneas be king among the Trojans, and his sons' sons that shall be born in days to come.
4149. Then made answer to him the ox-eyed, queenly Hera: Shaker of Earth, of thine own self take counsel in thine heart as touching Aeneas, whether thou wilt save him or suffer him to be slain for all his valour by Achilles, Peleus' son.
4150. We twain verily, even Pallas Athene and I, have sworn oaths full many among the immortals never to ward off from the Trojans the day of evil, nay, not when all Troy shall burn in the burning of consuming fire, and the warlike sons of the Achaeans shall be the burners thereof.
4151. Now when Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, heard this, he went his way amid the battle and the hurtling of spears, and came to the place where Aeneas was and glorious Achilles.
4152. Forthwith then he shed a mist over the eyes of Achilles, Peleus' son, and the ashen spear, well - shod with bronze, he drew forth from the shield of the great-hearted Aeneas and set it before the feet of Achilles, but Aeneas he lifted up and swung him on high from off the ground.
4153. Over many ranks of warriors and amny of chariots sprang Aeneas, soaring from the hand of the god, and came to the uttermost verge of the furious battle, where the Caucones were arraying them for the fight.
4154. Then close to his side came Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, and he spake, and addressed him with winged words: Aeneas, what god is it that thus biddeth thee in blindness of heart do battle man to man with the high - hearted son of Peleus, seeing he is a better man than thou, and therewithal dearer to the immortals?
4155. Nay, draw thou back, whensoever thou fallest in with him, lest even beyond thy doom thou enter the house of Hades.
4156. But when it shall be that Achilles hath met his death and fate, then take thou courage to fight among the foremost, for there is none other of the Achaeans that shall slay thee.
4157. So saying he left him there, when he had told him all.
4158. Then quickly from Achilles' eyes he scattered the wondrous mist; and he stared hard with his eyes, and mightily moved spake unto his own great-hearted spirit:
4159. Now look you, verily a great marvel is this that mine eyes behold.
4160. My spear lieth here upon the ground, yet the man may I nowise see at whom I hurled it, eager to slay him.
4161. Verily, it seemeth, Aeneas likewise is dear to the immortal gods, albeit I deemed that his boasting was idle and vain.
4162. Let him go his way !
4163. no heart shall he find to make trial of me again, seeing that now he is glad to have escaped from death.
4164. But come, I will call to the war-loving Danaans and go forth against the other Trojans to make trial of them.
4165. He spake, and leapt along the ranks, and called to each man:
4166. No longer now stand ye afar from the Trojans, ye goodly Achaeans, but come, let man go forth against man and be eager for the fray.
4167. Hard is it for me, how mighty soever I be, to deal with men so many, and to fight them all; not even Ares, for all he is an immortal god, nor Athene could control by dint of toil the jaws of such a fray.
4168. Howbeit so far as I avail with hands and feet and might, in no wise, methiinks, shall I be slack, nay, not a whit; but straight through their line will I go, nor deem I that any of the Trojans will be glad, whosoever shall draw nigh my spear.
4169. So spake he, urging them on; and to the Trojans glorious Hector ca11ed with a shout, and declared that he would go forth to face Achilles:
4170. Ye Trojans, high of heart, fear not the son of Peleus I too with words could fight even the immortals, but with the spear it were hard, for they are mightier far, Neither shall Achilles bring to fulfillment all his words, but a part thereof will he fulfill, and a part leave incomplete.
4171. Against him will I go forth, though his hands be even as fire, though his hands be as fire and his fury as the flashing steel.
4172. So spake he, urging them on; and the Trojans with their faces toward the foe lifted their spears on high, and the fury of both sides clashed confusedly, and the battle cry arose.
4173. Then Phoebus Apollo drew nigh to Hector, and spake, saying: Hector, no longer do thou anywise stand forth as a champion against Achilles, but in the throng await thou him and from amid the din of conflict, lest so be he smite thee with a cast of his spear or with his sword in close combat.
4174. FIXME: <this line intentionally blank>
4175. So spake he, and Hector fell back again into the throng of men, seized with fear, when he heard the voice of the god as he spoke.
4176. But Achilles leapt among the Trojans, his heart clothed about in might, crying a terrible cry, and first he slew Iphition, the valiant son of Otrynteus, the leader of a great host, whom a Naiad nymph bare to Otrynteus, sacker of cities, beneath snowy Timolus in the rich land of Hyde.
4177. Him, as he rushed straight upon him, goodly Achilles smote with a cast of his spear full upon the head, and his head was wholly choven asunder.
4178. And he fell with a thud, and goodly Achilles exulted over him:
4179. Low thou liest, Otrynteus, of all men most dread; here is thy death, albeit thy birth was by the Gygaean lake, where is the demesne of thy fathers, even by Hyllus, that teems with fish, and eddying Hermus.
4180. So spake he vauntingly, but darkness enfolded the other's eyes.
4181. Him the chariots of the Achaeans tore asunder with their tires in the forefront of the fray, and over him Demoleon, Antenor's son, a valiant warder of battle, did Achilles pierce in the temple through the helmet with cheek - pieces of bronze.
4182. Nor did the bronze helm stay the spear, but through it sped the spear-point and brake asunder the bone; and all the brain was scattered about within; so stayed he him in his fury.
4183. Hippodamas thereafter, as he leapt down from his car and fled before him, he smote upon the back with a thrust of his spear.
4184. And as he breathed forth his spirit he gave a bellowing cry, even as a bull that is dragged belloweth, when young men drag him about the altar of the lord of Helice; for in such doth the Shaker of Earth delight; even so bellowed Hippodamas, as his lordly spirit left his bones.
4185. But Achilles with his spear went on after godlike Polydorus, son of Priam.
4186. Him would his father nowise suffer to fight, for that among his children he was the youngest born and was dearest in his eyes; and in swiftness of foot he surpassed all.
4187. And lo, now in his folly, making show of his fleetness of foot, he was rushing through the foremost fighters, until he lost his life.
4188. Him swift - footed goodly Achilles smote full upon the back with a cast of his spear, as he darted past, even where the golden clasps of the belt were fastened, and the corselet overlapped; through this straight on its way beside the navel passed the spear-point, and he fell to his knees with a groan and a cloud of darkness enfolded him, and as he sank he clasped his bowels to him with his hands.
4189. But when Hector beheld his brother Polydorus, clasping his bowels in his hand and sinking to earth, down over his eyes a mist was shed, nor might he longer endure to range apart, but strode against Achilles, brandishing his sharp spear, in fashion like a flame.
4190. But when Achilles beheld him, even then sprang he up and spake vauntingly:
4191. Lo, nigh is the man, that above all hath stricken me to the heart, for that he slew the comrade I honoured.
4192. Not for long shall we any more shrink one from the other along the dykes of war.
4193. He said, and with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake unto goodly Hector: Draw nigh, that thou mayest the sooner enter the toils of destruction.
4194. But with no touch of fear, spake to him Hector of the flashing helm: Son of Peleus, think not with words to affright me, as I were a child, seeing I know well of myself to utter taunts and withal speech that is seemly.
4195. I know that thou art valiant, and I am weaker far than thou.
4196. Yet these things verily lie on the knees of the gods, whether I, albeit the weaker, shall rob thee of life with a cast of my spear; for my missile too hath been found keen ere now.
4197. He spake, and poised his spear and hurled it, but Athene with a breath turned it back from glorious Achilles, breathing full lightly; and it came back to goodly Hector, and fell there before his feet.
4198. But Achilles leapt upon him furiously, fain to slay him, crying a terrible cry.
4199. But Apollo snatched up Hector full easily, as a god may, and shrouded him in thick mist.
4200. Thrice then did swift -footed, goodly Achilles heap upon him with spear of bronze, and thrice he smote the thick mist.
4201. But when for the fourth time he rushed upon him like a god, then with a terrible cry he spake to him winged words:
4202. Now again, thou dog, art thou escaped from death, though verily thy bane came nigh thee; but once more hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to whom of a surety thou must make prayer, whenso thou goest amid the hurtling of spears.
4203. Verily I will yet make an end of thee, when I meet thee hereafter, if so be any god is helper to me likewise.
4204. But now will I make after others, whomsoever I may light upon.
4205. So saying he smote Dryops full upon the neck with a thrust of his spear, and he fell down before his feet.
4206. But he left him there, and stayed from fight Demuchus, Philetor's son, a valiant man and tall, striking him upon the knee with a cast of his spear; and thereafter he smote him with his great sword, and took away his life.
4207. Then setting upon Laogonus and Dardanus, sons twain of Bias, he thrust them both from their chariot to the ground, smiting the one with a cast of his spear and the other with his sword in close fight.
4208. Then Tros, Alastor's son — he came to clasp his knees, if so be he would spare him, by taking him captive, and let him go alive, and slay him not, having pity on one of like age, fool that he was !
4209. nor knew, he this, that with him was to be no hearkening; for nowise soft of heart or gentle of mind was the man, but exceeding fierce — he sought to clasp Achilles' knees with his hands, fain to make his prayer; but he smote him upon the liver with his sword, and forth the liver slipped, and the dark blood welling forth therefrom filled his bosom; and darkness enfolded his eyes, as he swooned.
4210. Then with his spear Achilles drew nigh unto Mulius and smote him upon the ear, and clean through the other ear passed the spear-point of bronze.
4211. Then smote he Agenor's son Echeclus full upon the head with his hilted sword, and all the blade grew warm with his blood, and down over his eyes came dark death and mighty fate.
4212. Thereafter Deucalion, at the point where the sinews of the elbow join, even there pierced he him through the arm with spear-point of bronze; and he abode his oncoming with arm weighed down, beholding death before him; but Achilles, smiting him with the sword upon his neck, hurled afar his head and therewithal his helmet; and the marrow spurted forth from the spine, and the corpse lay stretched upon the ground.
4213. Then went he on after the peerless son of Peires, even Rhigmus, that had come from deep -soiled Thrace.
4214. Him he smote in the middle with a cast of his spear, and the bronze was fixed in his belly; and he fell forth from out his car.
4215. And Areithous, his squire, as he was turning round the horses, did Achilles pierce in the back with his sharp spear, and thrust him from the car; and the horses ran wild.
4216. As through the deep glens of a parched mountainside rageth wondrous - blazing fire, and the deep forest burneth, and the wind as it driveth it on whirleth the flame everywhither, even so raged he everywhither with his spear, like some god, ever pressing hard upon them that he slew; and the black earth ran with blood.
4217. And as a man yoketh bulls broad of brow to tread white barley in a well - ordered threshing - floor, and quickly is the grain trodden out beneath the feet of the loud - bellowing bulls; even so beneath great- souled Achilles his single - hooved horses trampled alike on the dead and on the shields; and with blood was all the axle sprinkled beneath, and the rims round about the car, for drops smote upon them from the horses' hooves and from the tires.
4218. But the son of Peleus pressed on to win him glory, and with gore were his invincible hands bespattered.
4219. But when they were now come to the ford of the fair - flowing river, even eddying Xanthus that immortal Zeus begat, there Achilles cleft them asunder, and the one part he drave to the plain toward the city, even where the Achaeans were fleeing in rout the day before, what time glorious Hector was raging — thitherward poured forth some in rout, and Hera spread before them a thick mist to hinder them; but the half of them were pent into the deep- flowing river with its silver eddies.
4220. Therein they flung themselves with a great din, and the sheer - falling streams resounded, and the banks round about rang loudly; and with noise of shouting swam they this way and that, whirled about in the eddies.
4221. And as when beneath the onrush of fire locusts take wing to flee unto a river, and the unwearied fire burneth them with its sudden oncoming, and they shrink down into the water; even so before Achilles was the sounding stream of deep-eddying Xanthus filled confusedly with chariots and with men.
4222. But the Zeus-begotten left there his spear upon the bank, leaning against the tamarisk bushes, and himself leapt in like a god with naught but his sword; and grim was the work he purposed in his heart, and turning him this way and that he smote and smote; and from them uprose hideous groaning as they were smitten with the sword, and the water grew red with blood.
4223. And as before a dolphin, huge of maw, other fishes flee and fill the nooks of some harbour of fair anchorage in their terror, for greedily doth he devour whatsoever one he catcheth; even so cowered the Trojans in the streams of the dread river beneath the steep banks.
4224. And he, when his hands grew weary of slaying, chose twelve youths alive from out the river as blood - price for dead Patroclus, son of Menoetius.
4225. These led he forth dazed like fawns, and bound their hands behind them with shapely thongs, which they themselves wore about their pliant tunics, and gave them to his comrades to lead to the hollow ships.
4226. Then himself he sprang back again, full eager to slay.
4227. There met he a son of Dardanian Priam fleeing forth from the river, even Lycaon, whom on a time he had himself taken and brought sore against his will, from his father's orchard being come forth in the night; he was cutting with the sharp bronze the young shoots of a wild fig-tree, to be the rims of a chariot; but upon him, an unlooked - for bane, came goodly Achilles.
4228. For that time had he sold him into well - built Lemnos, bearing him thither on his ships, and the son of Jason had given a price for him; but from thence a guest - friend had ransomed him — and a great price he gave — even Eetion of Imbros, and had sent him unto goodly Arisbe; whence he had fled forth secretly and come to the house of his fathers.
4229. For eleven days' space had he joy amid his friends, being come forth from Lemnos; but on the twelfth a god cast him once more into the hands of Achilles, who was to send him to the house of Hades, loath though he was to go.
4230. When the swift -footed, goodly Achilles was ware of him, all unarmed, without helm or shield, nor had he a spear, but had thrown all these from him to the ground; for the sweat vexed him as he sought to flee from out the river, and weariness overmastered his knees beneath him; then, mightily moved, Achilles spake unto his own great-hearted spirit:
4231. Now look you, verily a great marvel is this that mine eyes behold !
4232. In good sooth the great-hearted Trojans that I have slain will rise up again from beneath the murky darkness, seeing this man is thus come back and hath escaped the pitiless day of doom, albeit he was sold into sacred Lemnos; neither hath the deep of the grey sea stayed him, that holdeth back full many against their will.
4233. Nay, but come, of the point of our spear also shall he taste, that I may see and know in heart whether in like manner he will come back even from beneath, or whether the life - giving earth will hold him fast, she that holdeth even him that is strong.
4234. So pondered he, and abode; but the other drew nigh him, dazed, eager to touch his knees, and exceeding fain of heart was he to escape from evil death and black fate.
4235. Then goodly Achilles lifted on high his long spear, eager to smite him, but Lycaon stooped and ran thereunder, and clasped his knees; and the spear passed over his back and was stayed in the ground, albeit fain to glut itself with the flesh of man.
4236. Then Lycaon besought him, with the one hand clasping his knees while with the other he held the sharp spear, and would not let it go; and he spake and addressed him with winged words: I beseech thee by thy knees, Achilles, and do thou respect me and have pity; in thine eyes, O thou nurtured of Zeus, am I even as a sacred suppliant, for at thy table first did I eat of the grain of Demeter on the day when thou didst take me captive in the well - ordered orchard, and didst lead me afar from father and from friends, and sell me into sacred Lemnos; and I fetched thee the price of an hundred oxen.
4237. Lo, now have I bought my freedom by paying thrice as much, and this is my twelfth morn since I came to Ilios, after many sufferings; and now again has deadly fate put me in thy hands; surely it must be that I am hated of father Zeus, seeing he hath given me unto thee again; and to a brief span of life did my mother bear me, even Laothoe, daughter of the old man Altes, — Altes that is lord over the war-loving Leleges, holding steep Pedasus on the Satnioeis.
4238. His daughter Priam had to wife, and therewithal many another, and of her we twain were born, and thou wilt butcher us both.
4239. Him thou didst lay low amid the foremost foot - men, even godlike Polydorus, when thou hadst smitten him with a cast of thy sharp spear, and now even here shall evil come upon me; for I deem not that I shall escape thy hands, seeing a god hath brought me nigh thee.
4240. Yet another thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to heart: slay me not; since I am not sprung from the same womb as Hector, who slew thy comrade the kindly and valiant.
4241. So spake to him the glorious son of Priam with words of entreaty, but all ungentle was the voice he heard:
4242. Fool, tender not ransom to me, neither make harangue.
4243. Until Patroclus met his day of fate, even till then was it more pleasing to me to spare the Trojans, and full many I took alive and sold oversea; but now is there not one that shall escape death, whomsoever before the walls of Ilios God shall deliver into my hands — aye, not one among all the Trojans, and least of all among the sons of Priam.
4244. Nay, friend, do thou too die; why lamentest thou thus?
4245. Patroclus also died, who was better far than thou.
4246. And seest thou not what manner of man am I, how comely and how tall?
4247. A good man was my father, and a goddess the mother that bare me; yet over me too hang death and mighty fate.
4248. There shall come a dawn or eve or mid-day, when my life too shall some man take in battle, whether he smite me with cast of the spear, or with an arrow from the string.
4249. So spake he, and the other's knees were loosened where he was and his heart was melted.
4250. The spear he let go, but crouched with both hands outstretched.
4251. But Achilles drew his sharp sword and smote him upon the collar - bone beside the neck, and all the two -edged sword sank in; and prone upon the earth he lay outstretched, and the dark blood flowed forth and wetted the ground.
4252. Him then Achilles seized by the foot and flung into the river to go his way, and vaunting over him he spake winged words:
4253. Lie there now among the fishes that shall lick the blood from thy wound, nor reck aught of thee, neither shall thy mother lay thee on a bier and make lament; nay, eddying Scamander shall bear thee into the broad gulf of the sea.
4254. Many a fish as he leapeth amid the waves, shall dart up beneath the black ripple to eat the white fat of Lycaon.
4255. So perish ye, till we be come to the city of sacred Ilios, ye in flight, and I making havoc in your rear.
4256. Not even the fair - flowing river with his silver eddies shall aught avail you, albeit to him, I ween, ye have long time been wont to sacrifice bulls full many, and to cast single - hooved horses while yet they lived.
4257. into his eddies.
4258. Howbeit even so shall ye perish by an evil fate till ye have all paid the price for the slaying of Patroclus and for the woe of the Achaeans, whom by the swift ships ye slew while I tarried afar.
4259. So spake he, and the river waxed the more wroth at heart, and pondered in mind how he should stay goodly Achilles from his labour and ward off ruin from the Trojans.
4260. Meanwhile the son of Peleus bearing his far-shadowing spear leapt, eager to slay him, upon Asteropaeus, son of Pelegon, that was begotten of wide - flowing Axius and Periboea, eldest of the daughters of Acessamenus; for with her lay the deep-eddying River.
4261. Upon him rushed Achilles, and Asteropaeus stood forth from the river to face him, holding two spears; and courage was set in his heart by Xanthus, being wroth because of the youths slain in battle, of whom Achilles was making havoc along the stream and had no pity.
4262. But when they were come near, as they advanced one against the other, then finst unto Asteropaeus spake swift - footed, goodly Achilles:
4263. Who among men art thou, and from whence, that thou darest come forth against me?
4264. Unhappy are they whose children face my might.
4265. Then spake unto him the glorious son of Pelegon: Great -souled son of Peleus, wherefore enquirest thou of my lineage?
4266. I come from deep-soiled Paeonia, a land afar, leading the Paeonians with their long spears, and this is now my eleventh morn, since I came to Ilios.
4267. But my lineage is from wide - flowing Axius — Axius, the water whereof flows the fairest over the face of the earth — who begat Pelegon famed for his spear, and he, men say, was my father.
4268. Now let us do battle, glorious Achilles.
4269. So spake he threatening, but goodly Achilles raised on high the spear of Pelian ash; howbeit the warrior Asteropaeus hurled with both spears at once, for he was one that could use both hands alike.
4270. With the one spear he smote the shield, but it brake not through, for the gold stayed it, the gift of the god and with the other he smote the right forearm of Achilles a grazing blow, and the black blood gushed forth; but the spear-point passed above him and fixed itself in the earth, fain to glut itself with flesh.
4271. Then Achilles in his turn hurled at Asteropaeus his straight - flying spear of ash, eager to slay him but missed the man and struck the high bank and up to half its length he fixed in the bank the spear of ash.
4272. But the son of Peleus, drawing his sharp sword from beside his thigh, leapt upon him furiously, and the other availed not to draw in his stout hand the ashen spear of Achilles forth from out the bank.
4273. Thrice he made it quiver in his eagerness to draw it, and thrice he gave up his effort; but the fourth time his heart was fain to bend and break the ashen spear of the son of Aeacus; howbeit ere that might be Achilles drew nigh and robbed him of life with his sword.
4274. In the belly he smote him beside the navel, and forth upon the ground gushed all his bowels, and darkness enfolded his eyes as he lay gasping.
4275. And Achilles leapt upon his breast and despoiled him of his arms, and exulted saying:
4276. Lie as thou art !
4277. Hard is it to strive with the children of the mighty son of Cronos, albeit for one begotten of a River.
4278. Thou verily declarest that thy birth is from the wide - flowing River, whereas I avow me to be of the lineage of great Zeus.
4279. The father that begat me is one that is lord among the many Myrmidons, even Peleus, son of Aeacus; and Aeacus was begotten of Zeus.
4280. Wherefore as Zeus is mightier than rivers that murmur seaward, so mightier too is the seed of Zeus than the seed of a river.
4281. For lo, hard beside thee is a great River, if so be he can avail thee aught; but it may not be that one should fight with Zeus the son of Cronos.
4282. With him doth not even king Achelous vie, nor the great might of deep-flowing Ocean, from whom all rivers flow and every sea, and all the springs and deep wells; howbeit even he hath fear of the lightning of great Zeus, and his dread thunder, whenso it crasheth from heaven.
4283. He spake, and drew forth from the bank his spear of bronze, and left Asteropaeus where he was, when he had robbed him of his life, lying in the sands; and the dark water wetted him.
4284. With him then the eels and fishes dealt, plucking and tearing the fat about his kidneys; but Achilles went his way after the Paeonians, lords of chariots, who were still huddled in rout along the eddying river, when they saw their best man mightily vanquished in the fierce conflict beneath the hands and sword of the son of Peleus.
4285. There slew he Thersilochus and Mydon and Astypylus and Mnesus and Thrasius and Aenius and Ophelestes; and yet more of the Paeonians would swift Achilles have slain, had not the deep-eddying River waxed wroth and called to him in the semblance of a man, sending forth a voice from out the deep eddy: O Achilles, beyond men art thou in might, and beyond men doest deeds of evil; for ever do the very gods give thee aid.
4286. If so be the son of Cronos hath granted thee to slay all the men of Troy, forth out of my stream at least do thou drive them, and work thy direful work on the plain.
4287. Lo, full are my lovely streams with dead men, nor can I anywise avail to pour my waters forth into the bright sea, being choked with dead, while thou ever slayest ruthlessly.
4288. Nay, come, let be; amazement holds me, thou leader of hosts.
4289. Then swift - footed Achilles answered him, saying:
4290. Thus shall it be, Scamander, nurtured of Zeus, even as thou biddest.
4291. Howbeit the proud Trojan will I not cease to slay until I have pent them in their city, and have made trial of Hector, man to man, whether he shall slay me or I him.
4292. So saying he leapt upon the Trojans like a god.
4293. Then unto Apollo spake the deep-eddying River:
4294. Out upon it, thou lord of the silver bow, child of Zeus, thou verily hast not kept the commandment of the son of Cronos, who straitly charged thee to stand by the side of the Trojans and to succour them, until the late- setting star of even shall have come forth and darkened the deep-soiled earth.
4295. He spake, and Achilles, famed for his spear, sprang from the bank and leapt into his midst; but the River rushed upon him with surging flood, and roused all his streams tumultuously, and swept along the many dead that lay thick within his bed, slain by Achilles; these lie cast forth to the land, bellowing the while like a bull, and the living he saved under his fair streams, hiding them in eddies deep and wide.
4296. In terrible wise about Achilles towered the tumultuous wave, and the stream as it beat upon his shield thrust him backward, nor might he avail to stand firm upon his feet.
4297. Then grasped he an elm, shapely and tall, but it fell uprooted and tore away all the bank, and stretched over the fair streams with its thick branches, and dammed the River himself, falling all within him; but Achilles, springing forth from the eddy hasted to fly with swift feet over the plain, for he was seized with fear.
4298. Howbeit the great god ceased not, but rushed upon him with dark - crested wave, that he might stay goodly Achilles from his labour, and ward off ruin from the Trojans.
4299. But the son of Peleus rushed back as far as a spear - cast with the swoop of a black eagle, the mighty hunter, that is alike the strongest and swiftest of winged things; like him he darted, and upon his breast the bronze rang terribly, while he swerved from beneath the flood and fled ever onward, and the River followed after, flowing with a mighty roar.
4300. As when a man that guideth its flow leadeth from a dusky spring a stream of water amid his plants and garden - lots a mattock in his hands and cleareth away the dams from the channel — and as it floweth all the pebbles beneath are swept along therewith, and it glideth swiftly onward with murmuring sound down a sloping place and outstrippeth even him that guideth it; — even thus did the flood of the River ever overtake Achilles for all he was fleet of foot; for the gods are mightier than men.
4301. And oft as swift - footed, goodly Achilles strove to make stand against him and to learn if all the immortals that hold broad heaven were driving him in rout, so often would the great flood of the heaven - fed River beat upon his shoulders from above; and he would spring on high with his feet in vexation of spirit, and the River was ever tiring his knees with its violent flow beneath, and was snatching away the ground from under his feet.
4302. Then the son of Peleus uttered a bitter cry, with a look at the broad heaven:
4303. Father Zeus, how is it that no one of the gods taketh it upon him in my pitiless plight to save me from out the River !
4304. thereafter let come upon me what may.
4305. None other of the heavenly gods do I blame so much, but only my dear mother, that beguiled me with false words, saying that beneath the wall of the mail - clad Trojans I should perish by the swift missiles of Apollo.
4306. Would that Hector had slain me, the best of the men bred here; then had a brave man been the slayer, and a brave man had he slain.
4307. But now by a miserable death was it appointed me to be cut off, pent in the great river, like a swine - herd boy whom a torrent sweepeth away as he maketh essay to cross it in winter.
4308. So spake he, and forthwith Poseidon and Pallas Athene drew nigh and stood by his side, being likened in form to mortal men, and they clasped his hand in theirs and pledged him in words.
4309. And among them Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth, was first to speak:
4310. Son of Peleus, tremble not thou overmuch, neither be anywise afraid, such helpers twain are we from the gods — and Zeus approveth thereof — even I and Pallas Athene.
4311. Therefore is it not thy doom to be vanquished by a river; nay, he shall soon give respite, and thou of thyself shalt know it.
4312. But we will give thee wise counsel, if so be thou wilt hearken.
4313. Make not thine hands to cease from evil battle until within the famed walls of Ilios thou hast pent the Trojan host, whosoever escapeth.
4314. But for thyself, when thou hast bereft Hector of life, come thou back to the ships; lo, we grant thee to win glory.
4315. When the twain had thus spoken, they departed to the immortals, but he went on toward the plain, or mightily did the bidding of the gods arouse him; and the whole plain was filled with a flood of water, and many goodly arms and corpses of youths slain in battle were floating there.
4316. But on high leapt his knees, as he rushed straight on against the flood, nor might the wide - flowing River stay him; for Athene put in him great strength.
4317. Nor yet would Scamander abate his fury, but was even more wroth against the son of Peleus, and raising himself on high he made the surge of his flood into a crest, and he called with a shout to Simois:
4318. Dear brother, the might of this man let us stay, though it need the two of us, seeing presently he will lay waste the great city of king Priam, neither will the Trojans abide him in battle.
4319. Nay, bear thou aid with speed, and fill thy streams with water from thy springs, and arouse all thy torrents; raise thou a great wave, and stir thou a mighty din of tree-trunks and stones, that we may check this fierce man that now prevaileth, and is minded to vie even with the gods.
4320. For I deem that his strength shall naught avail him, neither anywise his comeliness, nor yet that goodly armour, which, I ween, deep beneath the mere shall lie covered over with slime; and himself will I enwrap in sands and shed over him great store of shingle past all measuring; nor shall the Achaeans know where to gather his bones, with such a depth of silt shall I enshroud him.
4321. Even here shall be his sepulchre, nor shall he have need of a heaped - up mound, when the Achaeans make his funeral.
4322. He spake, and rushed tumultuously upon Achilles, raging on high and seething with foam and blood and dead men.
4323. And the dark flood of the heaven - fed River rose towering above him, and was at point to overwhelm the son of Peleus.
4324. But Hera called aloud, seized with fear for Achilles, lest the great deep- eddying River should sweep him away.
4325. And forthwith she spake unto Hephaestus, her dear son:
4326. Rouse thee, Crook -foot, my child !
4327. for it was against thee that we deemed eddying Xanthus to be matched in fight.
4328. Nay, bear thou aid with speed, and put forth thy flames unstintedly.
4329. But I will hasten and rouse from the sea a fierce blast of the West Wind and the white South, that shall utterly consume the dead Trojans and their battle gear, ever driving on the evil flame; and do thou along the banks of Xanthus burn up his trees, and beset him about with fire, nor let him anywise turn thee back with soft words or with threatenings; neither stay thou thy fury, save only when I call to thee with a shout; then do thou stay thy unwearied fire.
4330. So spake she, and Hephaestus made ready wondrous - blazing fire.
4331. First on the plain was the fire kindled, and burned the dead, the many dead that lay thick therein, slain by Achilles; and all the plain was parched, and the bright water was stayed.
4332. And as when in harvest- time the North Wind quickly parcheth again a freshly - watered orchard, and glad is he that tilleth it; so was the whole plain parched, and the dead he utterly consumed; and then against the River he turned his gleaming flame.
4333. Burned were the elms and the willows and the tamarisks, burned the lotus and the rushes and the galingale, that round the fair streams of the river grew abundantly; tormented were the eels and the fishes in the eddies, and in the fair streams they plunged this way and that, sore distressed by the blast of Hephaestus of many wiles.
4334. Burned too was the mighty River, and he spake and addressed the god: Hephaestus, there is none of the gods that can vie with thee, nor will I fight thee, ablaze with fire as thou art.
4335. Cease thou from strife,, and as touching the Trojans, let goodly Achilles forthwith drive them forth from out their city; what part have I in strife or in bearing aid?
4336. So spake he, burning the while with fire, and his fair streams were seething.
4337. And as a cauldron boileth within, when the fierce flame setteth upon it, while it melteth the lard of a fatted hog, and it bubbleth in every part, and dry faggots are set thereunder; so burned in fire his fair streams, and the water boiled; nor had he any mind to flow further onward, but was stayed; for the blast of the might of wise - hearted Hephaestus distressed him.
4338. Then with instant prayer he spake winged words unto Hera: Hera, wherefore hath thy son beset my stream to afflict it beyond all others?
4339. I verily am not so much at fault in thine eyes, as are all those others that are helpers of the Trojans.
4340. Howbeit I will refrain me, if so thou biddest, and let him also refrain.
4341. And I will furthermore swear this oath, never to ward off from the Trojans the day of evil, nay, not when all Troy shall burn with the burning of consuming fire, and the warlike sons of the Achaeans shall be the burners thereof.
4342. But when the goddess, white - armed Hera, heard this plea, forthwith she spake unto Hephaestus, her dear son: Hephaestus, withhold thee, my glorious son; it is nowise seemly thus to smite an immortal god for mortals' sake.
4343. So spake she, and Hephaestus quenched his wondrous - blazing fire, and once more in the fair river - bed the flood rushed down.
4344. But when the fury of Xanthus was quelled, the twain thereafter ceased, for Hera stayed them, albeit she was wroth; but upon the other gods fell strife heavy and grievous, and in diverse ways the spirit in their breasts was blown.
4345. Together then they clashed with a mighty din and the wide earth rang, and round about great heaven pealed as with a trumpet.
4346. And Zeus heard it where he sat upon Olympus, and the heart within him laughed aloud in joy as he beheld the gods joining in strife.
4347. Then no more held they long aloof, for Ares, piercer of shields, began the fray, and first leapt upon Athene, brazen spear in hand, and spake a word of reviling:
4348. Wherefore now again, thou dog-fly, art thou making gods to clash with gods in strife, in the fierceness of thy daring, as thy proud spirit sets thee on?
4349. Rememberest thou not what time thou movedst Diomedes, Tydeus' son, to wound me, and thyself in the sight of all didst grasp the spear and let drive straight at me, and didst rend my fair flesh?
4350. Therefore shalt thou now methinks, pay the full price of all that thou hast wrought.
4351. So saying he smote upon her tasselled aegis — the awful aegis against which not even the lightning of Zeus can prevail — thereon blood - stained Ares smote with his long spear.
4352. But she gave ground, and seized with her stout hand a stone that lay upon the plain, black and jagged and great, that men of former days had set to be the boundary mark of a field.
4353. Therewith she smote furious Ares on the neck, and loosed his limbs.
4354. Over seven roods he stretched in his fall, and befouled his hair with dust, and about him his armour clanged.
4355. But Pallas Athene broke into a laugh, and vaunting over him she spake winged words:
4356. Fool, not even yet hast thou learned how much mightier than thou I avow me to be, that thou matchest thy strength with mine.
4357. On this wise shalt thou satisfy to the full the Avengers invoked of thy mother, who in her wrath deviseth evil against thee, for that thou hast deserted the Achaeans and bearest aid to the overweening Trojans.
4358. When she had thus spoken, she turned from Ares her bright eyes.
4359. Him then the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, took by the hand, and sought to lead away, as he uttered many a moan, and hardly could he gather back to him his spirit.
4360. But when the goddess, white - armed Hera, was ware of her, forthwith she spake winged words to Athene:
4361. Out upon it, thou child of Zeus that beareth the aegis, unwearied one, lo, there again the dog-fly is leading Ares, the bane of mortals, forth from the fury of war amid the throng; nay, have after her.
4362. So spake she, and Athene sped in pursuit, glad at heart, and rushing upon her she smote Aphrodite on the breast with her stout hand; and her knees were loosened where she stood, and her heart melted.
4363. So the twain lay upon the bounteous earth, and vaunting over them Athene spake winged words:
4364. In such plight let all now be that are aiders of the Trojans when they fight against the mail - clad Argives, and on this wise bold and stalwart, even as Aphrodite came to bear aid to Ares, and braved my might.
4365. Then long ere this should we have ceased from war, having sacked Ilios, that well - peopled city.
4366. So spake she, and the goddess, white - armed Hera smiled thereat.
4367. But unto Apollo spake the lord Poseidon, the Shaker of Earth: Phoebus, wherefore do we twain stand aloof?
4368. It beseemeth not, seeing others have begun.
4369. Nay, it were the more shameful, if without fighting we should fare back to Olympus, to the house of Zeus with threshold of bronze.
4370. Begin, since thou art the younger; it were not meet for me, seeing I am the elder - born and know the more.
4371. Fool, how witless is the heart thou hast !
4372. Neither rememberest thou all the woes that we twain alone of all the gods endured at Ilios, what time we came at the bidding of Zeus and served the lordly Laomedon for a year's space at a fixed wage, and he was our taskmaster and laid on us his commands.
4373. I verily built for the Trojans round about their city a wall, wide and exceeding fair, that the city might never be broken; and thou, Phoebus, didst herd the sleek kine of shambling gait amid the spurs of wooded Ida, the many-ridged.
4374. But when at length the glad seasons were bringing to its end the term of our hire, then did dread Laomedon defraud us twain of all hire, and send us away with a threatening word.
4375. He threatened that he would bind together our feet and our hands above, and would sell us into isles that lie afar.
4376. Aye, and he made as if he would lop off with the bronze the ears of us both.
4377. So we twain fared aback with angry hearts, wroth for the hire he promised but gave us not.
4378. It is to his folk now that thou showest favour, neither seekest thou with us that the overweening Trojans may perish miserably in utter ruin with their children and their honoured wives.
4379. Then spake unto him lord Apollo, that worketh afar: Shaker of Earth, as nowise sound of mind wouldest thou count me, if I should war with thee for the sake of mortals, pitiful creatures, that like unto leaves are now full of flaming life, eating the fruit of the field, and now again pine away and perish.
4380. Nay, with speed let us cease from strife, and let them do battle by themselves.
4381. So saying he turned him back, for he had shame to deal in blows with his father's brother.
4382. But his sister railed at him hotly, even the queen of the wild beasts, Artemis of the wild wood, and spake a word of reviling:
4383. Lo, thou fleest, thou god that workest afar, and to Poseidon hast thou utterly yielded the victory, and given him glory for naught !
4384. Fool, why bearest thou a bow thus worthless as wind?
4385. Let me no more hear thee in the halls of our father boasting as of old among the immortal gods that thou wouldest do battle in open combat with Poseidon.
4386. So spake she, but Apollo, that worketh afar, answered her not.
4387. Howbeit the revered wife of Zeus waxed wroth, and chid the archer queen with words of reviling:
4388. How now art thou fain, thou bold and shameless thing, to stand forth against me?
4389. No easy foe I tell thee, am I, that thou shouldst vie with me in might, albeit thou bearest the bow, since it was against women that Zeus made thee a lion, and granted thee to slay whomsoever of them thou wilt.
4390. In good sooth it is better on the mountains to be slaying beasts and wild deer than to fight amain with those mightier than thou.
4391. Howbeit if thou wilt, learn thou of war, that thou mayest know full well how much mightier am I, seeing thou matchest thy strength with mine.
4392. Therewith she caught both the other's hands by the wrist with her left hand, and with her right took the bow and its gear from her shoulders, and with these self - same weapons, smiling the while, she beat her about the ears, as she turned this way and that; and the swift arrows fell from out the quiver.
4393. Then weeping the goddess fled from before her even as a dove that from before a falcon flieth into a hollow rock, a cleft — nor is it her lot to be taken; even so fled Artemis weeping, and left her bow and arrows where they lay.
4394. But unto Leto spake the messenger Argeiphontes: Leto, it is not I that will anywise fight with thee; a hard thing were it to bandy blows with the wives of Zeus, the cloud - gatherer; nay, with a right ready heart boast thou among the immortal gods that thou didst vanquish me with thy great might.
4395. So spake he, and Leto gathered up the curved bow and the arrows that had fallen hither and thither amid the whirl of dust.
4396. She then, when she had taken her daughter's bow and arrows, went back; but the maiden came to Olympus, to the house of Zeus with threshold of bronze, and sat down weeping upon her father's knees, while about her the fragrant robe quivered; and her father, the son of Cronos, clasped her to him, and asked of her, laughing gently:
4397. Who now of the sons of heaven, dear child, hath entreated thee thus wantonly as though thou wert working some evil before the face of all?
4398. Then answered him the fair - crowned huntress of the echoing chase:
4399. Thy wife it was that buffeted me, father, even white - armed Hera, from whom strife and contention have been made fast upon the immortals.
4400. On this wise spake they one to the other; but Phoebus Apollo entered into sacred Ilios, for he was troubled for the wall of the well - builded city, lest the Danaans beyond what was ordained should lay it waste on that day.
4401. But the other gods that are for ever went unto Olympus, some of them in wrath and some exulting greatly, and they sate them down beside the Father, the lord of the dark clouds.
4402. But Achilles was still slaying alike the Trojans themselves and their single - hooved horses.
4403. And as when smoke riseth and reacheth the wide heaven from a city that burneth, and the wrath of the gods driveth it on — it causeth toil to all and upon many doth it let loose woes — even so caused Achilles toil and woes for the Trojans.
4404. And the old man Priam stood upon the heaven - built wall, and was ware of monstrous Achilles, and how before him the Trojans were being driven in headlong rout; and help there was none.
4405. Then with a groan he gat him down to the ground from the wall, calling the while to the glorious keepers of the gate along the wall:
4406. Wide open hold ye the gates with your hands until the folk shall come to the city in their rout, for lo, here at hand is Achilles, as he driveth them on; now methinks shall there be sorry work.
4407. But whenso they have found respite, being gathered within the wall, then close ye again the double doors, close fitted; for I am adread lest yon baneful man leap within the wall.
4408. So spake he, and they undid the gates and thrust back the bars; and the gates being flung wide wrought deliverance.
4409. But Apollo leapt forth to face Achilles, that so he might ward off ruin from the Trojans.
4410. And they, the while, were fleeing straight for the city and the high wall, parched with thirst, and begrimed with dust from the plain, while Achilles pressed upon them furiously with his spear; for fierce madness ever possessed his heart, and he was eager to win him glory.
4411. Then would the sons of the Achaeans have taken high - gated Troy, had not Phoebus Apollo aroused goodly Agenor, Antenor's son, a peerless warrior and a stalwart.
4412. In his heart he put courage, and himself stood by his side, that he might ward from him the heavy hands of death; against the oak he leaned, and he was enfolded in deep mist.
4413. So when Agenor was ware of Achilles, sacker of cities, he halted, and many things did his heart darkly ponder as he abode; and mightily moved he spake unto his own great-hearted spirit:
4414. Ah, woe is me; if I flee before mighty Achilles, there where the rest are being driven in rout, even so shall he overtake and butcher me in my cowardice.
4415. But what if I leave these to be driven before Achilles, son of Peleus, and with my feet flee from the wall elsewhither, toward the Ilean plain, until I be come to the glens and the spurs of Ida, and hide me in the thickets?
4416. Then at even, when I have bathed me in the river and cooled me of my sweat, I might get me back to Ilios.
4417. But why doth my heart thus hold converse with me?
4418. Let it not be that he mark me as I turn away from the city toward the plain, and darting after me overtake me by his fleetness of foot.
4419. Then will it no more be possible to escape death and the fates, for exceeding mighty is he above all mortal men.
4420. What then if in front of the city I go forth to meet him?
4421. Even his flesh too, I ween, may be pierced with the sharp bronze, and in him is but one life, and mortal do men deem him to be; howbeit Zeus, son of Cronos, giveth him glory.
4422. So saying he gathered himself together to abide Achilles' oncoming, and within him his valiant heart was fain to war and to do battle.
4423. Even as a pard goeth forth from a deep thicket before the face of a huntsman, neither is anywise afraid at heart, nor fleeth when she heareth the baying of the hounds; for though the man be beforehand with her and smite her with thrust or with dart, yet even pierced through with the spear she ceaseth not from her fury until she grapple with him or be slain; even so lordly Antenor's son, goodly Agenor, refused to flee till he should make trial of Achilles, but held before him his shield that was well - balanced upon every side, and aimed at Achilles with his spear, and shouted aloud: Verily, I ween, thou hopest in thy heart, glorious Achilles, on this day to sack the city of the lordly Trojans.
4424. Thou fool !
4425. in sooth many be the woes that shall yet be wrought because of her.
4426. Within her are we, many men and valiant, that in front of our dear parents and wives and sons guard Ilios; nay, it is thou that shalt here meet thy doom, for all thou art so dread and so bold a man of war.
4427. He spake, and hurled the sharp spear from his heavy hand, and smote him on the shin below the knee, and missed him not; and the greave of new- wrought tin rang terribly upon him; but back from him it smote leapt the bronze, and pierced not through, for the gift of the god stayed it.
4428. And the son of Peleus in his turn set upon godlike Agenor; howbeit Apollo suffered him not to win glory, but snatched away Agenor, and shrouded him in thick mist, and sent him forth from the war to go his way in peace.
4429. But Apollo by craft kept the son of Peleus away from the folk, for likened in all things to Agenor's self the god that worketh afar took his stand before his feet; and Achilles rushed upon him swiftly to pursue him.
4430. And while he pursued him over the wheat - bearing plain, turning him toward the river, deep -eddying Scamander, as he by but little outran him — for by craft did Apollo beguile him, that he ever hoped to overtake him in his running — meanwhile the rest of the Trojans that were fleeing in rout came crowding gladly toward the city, and the town was filled with the throng of them.
4431. Neither dared they longer to await one another outside the city and wall, and to know who perchance was escaped and who had been slain in the fight; but with eager haste they poured into the city, whomsoever of them his feet and knees might save.
4432. So they throughout the city, huddled in rout like fawns, were cooling their sweat and drinking and quenching their thirst, as they rested on the fair battlements; while the Achaeans drew near the wall leaning their shields against their shoulders.
4433. But Hector did deadly fate ensnare to abide there where he was in front of Ilios and the Scaean gates.
4434. Then unto the son of Peleus spake Phoebus Apollo: Wherefore, son of Peleus, dost thou pursue me with swift feet, thyself a mortal, while I am an immortal god?
4435. Not even yet hast thou known me that I am a god, but thou ragest incessantly !
4436. Hast thou in good sooth no care for thy toil regarding the Trojans whom thou dravest in rout, who now are gathered into the city, while thou hast turned thee aside hitherward?
4437. Thou shalt never slay me, for lo, I am not one that is appointed to die.
4438. Then with a mighty burst of anger spake to him swift - footed Achilles:
4439. Thou hast foiled me, thou god that workest afar, most cruel of all gods in that thou hast now turned me hither from the wall; else had many a man yet bitten the ground or ever they came into Ilios.
4440. Now hast thou robbed me of great glory, aud them hast thou saved full easily, seeing thou hadst no fear of vengeance in the aftertime.
4441. Verily I would avenge me on thee, had I but the power.
4442. So spake he, and was gone toward the city in pride of heart, speeding as speedeth with a chariot a horse that is winner of prizes, one that lightly courseth at full speed over the plain; even so swiftly plied Achilles his feet and knees.
4443. Him the old man Priam was first to behold with his eyes, as he sped all - gleaming over the plain, like to the star that cometh forth at harvest-time, and brightly do his rays shine amid the host of stars in the darkness of night, the star that men call by name the Dog of Orion.
4444. Brightest of all is he, yet withal is he a sign of evil, and bringeth much fever upon wretched mortals.
4445. Even in such wise did the bronze gleam upon the breast of Achilles as he ran.
4446. And the old man uttered a groan, and beat upon his head with his hands, lifting them up on high, and with a groan he called aloud, beseeching his dear son, that was standing before the gates furiously eager to do battle with Achilles.
4447. To him the old man spake piteously, stretching forth his arms:
4448. Hector, my dear child, abide not, I pray thee, yon man, alone with none to aid thee, lest forthwith thou meet thy doom, slain by the son of Peleus, since verily he is far the mightier — cruel that he is.
4449. I would that he were loved by the gods even as by me !
4450. Then would the dogs and vuhtures speedily devour him as he lay unburied; so would dread sorrow depart from my soul, seeing he hath made me bereft of sons many and valiant, slaying them and selling them into isles that hie afar.
4451. For even now there be twain of my sons, Lycaon and Polydorus, that I cannot see amid the Trojans that are gathered into the city, even they that Laothoe bare me, a princess among women.
4452. But if they be yet alive in the camp of the foe, then verily will we ransom them with bronze and gold, seeing there is store thereof in my house; for gifts full many did the old Altes, of glorious name, give to his daughter.
4453. But and if they be even now dead and in the house of Hades, then shall there be sorrow to my heart and to their mother, to us that gave them birth; but to the rest of the host a briefer sorrow, if so be thou die not as well, slain by Achilles.
4454. Nay, enter within the walls, my child, that thou mayest save the Trojan men and Trojan women, and that thou give not great glory to the son of Peleus, and be thyself reft of thy dear life.
4455. Furthermore, have thou compassion on me that yet can feel — on wretched me whom the father, son of Cronos, will shay by a grievous fate on the threshold of old age, when I have beheld ills full many, my sons perishing and my daughters haled away, and my treasure chambers laid waste, and little children hurled to the ground in the dread conflict, and my sons " wives being haled away beneath the deadly hands of the Achaeans.
4456. Myself then last of all at the entering in of my door shall ravening dogs rend, when some man by thrust or cast of the sharp bronze hath reft my limbs of life — even the dogs that in my halls I reared at my table to guard my door, which then having drunk my blood in the madness of their hearts, shall lie there in the gateway.
4457. A young man it beseemeth wholly, when he is slain in battle, that he lie mangled by the sharp bronze; dead though he be, all is honourable whatsoever be seen.
4458. But when dogs work shame upon the hoary head and hoary beard and on the nakedness of an old man slain, lo, this is the most piteous thing that cometh upon wretched mortals.
4459. Thus spake the old man, and with his hands he plucked and tore the hoary hairs from his head; but he could not persuade the heart of Hector.
4460. And over against him the mother in her turn wailed and shed tears, loosening the folds of her robe, while with the other hand she showed her breast, and amid shedding of tears she spake unto him winged words:
4461. Hector, my child, have thou respect unto this and pity me, if ever I gave thee the breast to lull thy pain.
4462. Think thereon, dear child, and ward off yon foemen from within the wall, neither stand thou forth to face him.
4463. Cruel is he; for if so be he shay thee, never shall I lay thee on a bier and bewail thee, dear plant, born of mine own self, nay, nor shall thy bounteous wife; but far away from us by the ships of the Argives shall swift dogs devour thee.
4464. So the twain with weeping spake unto their dear son, beseeching him instantly; howbeit they could not persuade the heart of Hector, but he abode Achilles as he drew nigh in his mightiness.
4465. And as a serpent of the mountain awaiteth a man at his lair, having fed upon evil herbs, and dread wrath hath entered into him, and terribly he glareth as he coileth him about within his lair; even so Hector in his courage unquenchable would not give ground, leaning his bright shield against the jutting wall.
4466. Then, mightily moved, he spake unto his own great-hearted spirit:
4467. Ah, woe is me, if I go within the gates and the walls Polydamas will be the first to put reproach upon me, for that he bade me lead the Trojans to the city during this fatal night, when goodly Achilles arose.
4468. Howbeit I hearkened not — verily it had been better far !
4469. But now, seeing I have brought the host to ruin in my blind folly, I have shame of the Trojans, and the Trojans' wives with trailing robes, lest haply some other baser man may say: ‘ Hector, trusting in his own might, brought ruin on the host.’
4470. So will they say; but for me it were better far to meet Achilles man to man and shay him, and so get me home, or myself perish gloriously before the city.
4471. Or what if I lay down my bossed shield and my heavy helm, and leaning my spear against the wall, go myself to meet peerless Achilles, and promise him that Helen, and with her all the store of treasure that Alexander brought in his hollow ships to Troy — the which was the beginning of strife — will we give to the sons of Atreus to take away, and furthermore and separate therefrom will make due division with the Achaeans of all that this city holdeth; and if thereafter I take from the Trojans an oath sworn by the elders that they will hide nothing, but will divide all in twain, even all the treasure that the lovely city holdeth within?
4472. But why doth my heart thus hold converse with me?
4473. Let it not be that I go and draw nigh him, but he then pity me not nor anywise have reverence unto me, but slay me out of hand all unarmed, as I were a woman, when I have put from me mine armour.
4474. In no wise may I now from oak - tree or from rock hold dalliance with him, even as youth and maiden — youth and maiden !
4475. — hold dalliance one with the other.
4476. Better were it to clash in strife with all speed; let us know to which of us twain the Olympian will vouchsafe glory.
4477. So he pondered as he abode, and nigh to him came Achilles, the peer of Enyalius, warrior of the waving helm, brandishing over his right shoulder the Pelian ash, his terrible spear; and all round about the bronze flashed like the gleam of blazing fire or of the sun as he riseth.
4478. But trembling gat hold of Hector when he was ware of him, neither dared he any more abide where he was, but left the gates behind him, and fled in fear; and the son of Peleus rushed after him, trusting in his fleetness of foot.
4479. As a falcon in the mountains, swiftest of winged things, swoopeth lightly after a trembling dove: she fleeth before him, and he hard at hand darteth ever at her with shrill cries, and his heart biddeth him seize her; even so Achilles in his fury sped straight on, and Hector fled beneath the wall of the Trojans, and plied his limbs swiftly.
4480. Past the place of watch, and the wind - waved wild fig-tree they sped, ever away from under the wall along the waggon-track, and came to the two fair - flowing fountains, where well up the two springs that feed eddying Scamander.
4481. The one floweth with warm water, and round about a smoke goeth up therefrom as it were from a blazing fire, while the other even in summer floweth forth cold as hail or chill snow or ice that water formeth.
4482. And there hard by the selfsame springs are broad washing - tanks, fair and wrought of stone, where the wives and fair daughters of the Trojans were wont to wash bright raiment of old in the time of peace, before the sons of the Achaeans came.
4483. Thereby they ran, one fleeing, and one pursuing.
4484. In front a good man fled, but one mightier far pursued him swiftly; for it was not for beast of sacrifice or for bull's hide that they strove, such as are men's prizes for swiftness of foot, but it was for the life of horse - taming Hector that they ran.
4485. And as when single - hooved horses that are winners of prizes course swiftly about the turning - points, and some — great prize is set forth, a tripod haply or a woman, in honour of a warrior that is dead; even so these twain circled thrice with swift feet about the city of Priam; and all the gods gazed upon them.
4486. Then among these the father of men and gods was first to speak:
4487. Look you now, in sooth a well - loved man do mine eyes behold pursued around the wall; and my heart hath sorrow for Hector, who hath burned for me many thighs of oxen on the crests of many - ridged Ida, and at other times on the topmost citadel; but now again is goodly Achilles pursuing him with swift feet around the city of Priam.
4488. Nay then, come, ye gods, bethink you and take counsel whether we shall save him from death, or now at length shall slay him, good man though he be, by the hand of Achilles, son of Peleus.
4489. Then spake unto him the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene: O Father, Lord of the bright lightning and of the dark cloud, what a word hast thou said !
4490. A man that is mortal, doomed long since by fate, art thou minded to deliver again from dolorous death?
4491. Do as thou wilt; but be sure that we other gods assent not all thereto.
4492. Then in answer to her spake Zeus, the cloud - gatherer:
4493. Be of good cheer, Tritogeneia, dear child.
4494. In no wise do I speak with full purpose of heart, but am minded to be kindly to thee.
4495. Do as thy pleasure is and hold thee back no more.
4496. So saying he urged on Athene that was already eager, and down from the peaks of Olympus she went darting.
4497. But hard upon Hector pressed swift Achilles in ceaseless pursuit.
4498. And as when on the mountains a hound rouseth from his covert the fawn of a deer and chaseth him through glens and glades, and though he escape for a time, cowering beneath a thicket, yet doth the hound track him out and run ever on until he find him; even so Hector escaped not the swift - footed son of Peleus.
4499. Oft as he strove to rush straight for the Dardanian gates to gain the shelter of the well - built walls, if so be his fellows from above might succour him with missiles, so oft would Achilles be beforehand with him and turn him back toward the plain, but himself sped on by the city's walls.
4500. And as in a dream a man availeth not to pursue one that fleeth before him — the one availeth not to flee, nor the other to pursue — even so Achilles availed not to overtake Hector in his fleetness, neither Hector to escape.
4501. And how had Hector escaped the fates of death, but that Apollo, albeit for the last and latest time, drew nigh him to rouse his strength and make swift his knees?
4502. And to his folk goodly Achilles made sign with a nod of his head, and would not suffer them to hurl at Hector their bitter darts, lest another might smite him and win glory, and himself come too late.
4503. But when for the fourth time they were come to the springs, lo then the Father lifted on high his golden scales, and set therein two fates of grievous death, one for Achilles, and one for horse - taming Hector; then he grasped the balance by the midst and raised it; and down sank the day of doom of Hector, and departed unto Hades; and Phoebus Apollo left him.
4504. But unto Peleus' son came the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene, and drawing nigh she spake to him winged words:
4505. Now in good sooth, glorious Achilles, dear to Zeus, have I hope that to the ships we twain shall bear off great glory for the Achaeans, having slain Hector, insatiate of battle though he be; for now is it no more possible for him to escape us, nay, not though Apollo, that worketh afar, should travail sore, grovelling before Father Zeus, that beareth the aegis.
4506. But do thou now stand, and get thy breath; myself will I go and persuade yon warrior to do battle with thee man to man.
4507. So spake Athene, and he obeyed and was glad at heart, and stood leaning upon his bronze - barbed spear of ash.
4508. But she left him, and came to goodly Hector in the likeness of Deiphobus both in form and untiring voice; and drawing nigh she spake to him winged words:
4509. Dear brother, full surely fleet Achilles doeth violence unto thee, chasing thee with swift feet around the city of Priam.
4510. But come, let us stand, and abiding here ward off his onset.
4511. Then spake to her great Hector of the flashing helm: Deiphobus, verily in time past thou wast far the dearest of my brethren, that were born of Hecabe and Priam, but now I deem that I shall honour thee in my heart even more, seeing thou hast dared for my sake, when thine eyes beheld me, to come forth from out the wall, while the others abide within.
4512. To him then spake again the goddess, flashing - eyed Athene: Dear brother, in sooth my father and queenly mother, yea, and my comrades round about me, besought me much, entreating me each in turn that I should abide there, in such wise do they all tremble before Achilles; but my heart within me was sore distressed with bitter grief.
4513. Howbeit now let us charge straight at him and do battle, neither let there be anywise a sparing of spears, to the end that we may know whether Achilles shall slay us twain, and bear our bloody spoils to the hollow ships, or whether he shall haply be vanquished by thy spear.
4514. By such words and by guile Athene led him on.
4515. And when they were come near as they advanced one against the other, then first unto Achilles spake great Hector of the glancing helm:
4516. No longer, son of Peleus, will I flee from thee, as before I thrice fled around the great city of Priam, nor ever had the heart to abide thy onset; but now again my spirit biddeth me stand and face thee, whether I slay or be slain.
4517. But come hither, let us call the gods to witness, for they shall be the best witnesses and guardians of our covenant: I will do unto thee no foul despite, if Zeus grant me strength to outstay thee, and I take thy life; but when I have stripped from thee thy glorious armour, Achilles, I will give thy dead body back to the Achaeans; and so too do thou.
4518. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake unto him Achilles, swift of foot:
4519. Hector, talk not to me, thou madman, of covenants.
4520. As between lions and men there are no oaths of faith, nor do wolves and lambs have hearts of concord but are evil-minded continually one against the other, even so is it not possible for thee and me to be friends, neither shall there be oaths between us till one or the other shall have fallen, and glutted with his blood Ares, the warrior with tough shield of hide.
4521. Bethink thee of all manner of valour: now in good sooth it behoveth thee to quit thee as a spearman and a dauntless warrior.
4522. No more is there any escape for thee, but forthwith shall Pallas Athene lay thee low by my spear.
4523. Now shalt thou pay back the full price of all my sorrows for my comrades, whom thou didst slay when raging with thy spear.
4524. He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled it; howbeit glorious Hector, looking steadily at him, avoided it; for he was ware of it in time and crouched, and the spear of bronze flew over, and fixed itself in the earth; but Pallas Athene caught it up, and gave it back to Achilles, unseen of Hector, shepherd of the host.
4525. And Hector spake unto the peerless son of Peleus:
4526. Thou hast missed, neither in any wise, as it seemeth, O Achilles like to the gods, hast thou yet known from Zeus of my doom, though verily thou thoughtest it.
4527. Howbeit thou wast but glib of tongue and a cunning knave in speech, to the end that seized with fear of thee I might be forgetful of my might and my valour.
4528. Not as I flee shalt thou plant thy spear in my back; nay, as I charge upon thee drive thou it straight through my breast, if a god hath vouchsafed thee this.
4529. Now in turn avoid thou my spear of bronze.
4530. Would that thou mightest take it all into thy flesh !
4531. So would war be lighter for the Trojans, if thou wert but dead; for thou art their greatest bane.
4532. He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled it, and smote full upon the shield of the son of Peleus, and missed him not; but far from the shield the spear leapt back.
4533. And Hector waxed wroth for that the swift shaft had flown vainly from his hand, and he stood confounded, for he had no second spear of ash.
4534. Then he shouted aloud, and called to Deiphobus of the white shield, and asked of him a long spear; but he was nowise nigh.
4535. And Hector knew all in his heart, and spake, saying:
4536. Out upon it, in good sooth have the gods called me to my death.
4537. For I deemed that the warrior Deiphobus was at hand, but lo, he is within the wall, and Athene hath beguiled me.
4538. Now of a surety is evil death nigh at hand, and no more afar from me, neither is there way of escape.
4539. So I ween from of old was the good pleasure of Zeus, and of the son of Zeus, the god that smiteth afar, even of them that aforetime were wont to succour me with ready hearts; but now again is my doom come upon me.
4540. Nay, but not without a struggle let me die, neither ingloriously, but in the working of some great deed for the hearing of men that are yet to be.
4541. So saying, he drew his sharp sword that hung beside his flank, a great sword and a mighty, and gathering himself together swooped like an eagle of lofty flight that darteth to the plain through the dark clouds to seize a tender lamb or a cowering hare; even so Hector swooped, brandishing his sharp sword.
4542. And Achilles rushed upon him, his beart ful of savage wrath, and before his breast he made a covering of his shield, fair and richly - dight, and tossed his bright four-horned helm; and fair about it waved the plumes wrought of gold, that Hephaestus had set thick about the crest.
4543. As a star goeth forth amid stars in the darkness of night, the star of evening, that is set in heaven as the fairest of all; even so went forth a gleam from the keen spear that Achilles poised in his right hand, as he devised evil for goodly Hector, looking the while upon his fair flesh to find where it was most open to a blow.
4544. Now all the rest of his flesh was covered by the armour of bronze, the goodly armour that he had stripped from mighty Patroclus when he slew him; but there was an opening where the collar bones part the neck and shoulders, even the gullet, where destruction of life cometh most speedily; even there, as he rushed upon him, goodly Achilles let drive with his spear; and clean out through the tender neck went the point.
4545. Howbeit the ashen spear, heavy with bronze, clave not the windpipe, to the end that he might yet make answer and speak unto his foe.
4546. Then fell he in the dust, and goodly Achilles exulted over him;
4547. Hector, thou thoughtest, I ween, whilst thou wast spoiling Patroclus, that thou wouldest be safe, and hadst no thought of me that was afar, thou fool.
4548. Far from him a helper, mightier far, was left behind at the hollow ships, even I, that have loosed thy knees.
4549. Thee shall dogs and birds rend in unseemly wise, but to him shall the Achaeans give burial.
4550. Then, his strength all spent, spake to him Hector of the flashing helm: I implore thee by thy life and knees and parents, suffer me not to be devoured of dogs by the ships of the Achaeans; nay, take thou store of bronze and gold, gifts that my fathec and queenly mother shall give thee, but my bodv give thou back to my home, that the Trojans and the Trojans' wives may give me my due meed of fire in my death.
4551. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake unto him Achilhes swift of foot:
4552. Implore me not, dog, by knees or parents.
4553. Would that in any wise wrath and fury might bid me carve thy flesh and myself eat it raw, because of what thou hast wrought, as surely as there lives no man that shall ward off the dogs from thy head; nay, not though they should bring hither and weigh out ransom ten -fold, aye, twenty - fold, and should promise yet more; nay, not though Priam, son of Dardanus, should bid pay thy weight in gold; not even so shall thy queenly mother lay thee on a bier and make lament for thee, the son herself did bear, but dogs and birds shall devour thee utterly.
4554. Then even in dying spake unto him Hector of the flashing helm:
4555. Verily I know thee well, and forbode what shall be, neither was it to be that I should persuade thee; of a truth the heart in thy breast is of iron.
4556. Bethink thee now lest haply I bring the wrath of the gods upon thee on the day when Paris and Phoebus Apollo shall slay thee, valorous though thou art, at the Scaean gate.
4557. Even as he thus spake the end of death enfolded him and his soul fleeting from his limbs was gone to Hades, bewailing her fate, leaving manliness and youth.
4558. And to him even in his death spake goodly Achilles:
4559. Lie thou dead; my fate will I accept whenso Zeus willeth to bring it to pass and the other immortal gods.
4560. He spake, and from the corpse drew forth his spear of bronze and laid it aside, and set him to strip from the shoulders the blood - stained armour.
4561. And the other sons of the Achaeans ran up round about, and gazed upon the stature and wondrous comeliness of Hector, neither did any draw nigh but dealt him a wound.
4562. And thus would one speak, with a look at his neighbour:
4563. Look you, in good sooth softer is Hector for the handling now than when he burned the ships with blazing fire.
4564. Thus would one speak, and drawing nigh would deal a wound.
4565. But when goodly Achilles, swift of foot, had despoiled him, then stood he up among the Achaeans and spake winged words:
4566. My friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, seeing the gods have vouchsafed us to slay this man, that hath wrought much evil beyond all the host of the others, come, let us make trial in arms about the city, to the end that we may yet further know what purpose the Trojans have in mind, whether they will leave their high city now that this man is fallen, or whether they are minded to abide, even though Hector be no more.
4567. But why doth my heart thus hold converse with me?
4568. There lieth by the ships a dead man unwept, unburied, even Patroclus; him will I not forget so long as I abide among the living, and my knees are quick.
4569. Nay, if even in the house of Hades men forget their dead, yet will I even there remember my dear comrade.
4570. But come, singing our song of victory, ye sons of the Achaeans, let us go back to the hollow ships and bring thither this corpse.
4571. We have won us great glory; we have slain goodly Hector, to whom the Trojans made prayer throughout their city, as unto a god.
4572. He spake, and devised foul entreatment for goodly Hector.
4573. The tendons of both his feet behind he pierced from heel to ankle, and made fast therethrough thongs of oxhide, and bound them to his chariot, but left the head to trail.
4574. Then when he had mounted his car and had lifted therein the glorious armour, he touched the horses with the lash to start thiem, and nothing loath the pair sped onward.
4575. And from Hector as he was dragged the dust rose up, and on either side his dark hair flowed outspread, and all in the dust lay the head that was before so fair; but now had Zeus given him over to his foes to suffer foul entreatment in his own native land.
4576. So was his head all befouled with dust; but his mother tore her hair and from her flung far her gleaming veil and uttered a cry exceeding loud at sight of her son.
4577. And a piteous groan did his father utter, and around them the folk was holden of wailing and groaning throughout the city.
4578. Most like to this was it as though all beetling Ilios were utterly burning with fire.
4579. And the folk had much ado to hold back the old man in his frenzy, fain as he was to go forth from the Dardanian gates.
4580. To all he made prayer, grovelling the while in the filth, and calling on each man by name:
4581. Withhold, my friends, and suffer me for all your love to go forth from the city alone, and hie me to the ships of the Achaeans.
4582. I will make prayer to yon ruthless man, yon worker of violence, if so be he may have shame before his fellows and have pity on my old age.
4583. He too, I ween, hath a father such as I am, even Peleus, that begat him and reared him to be a bane to Trojans; but above all others hath he brought woe upon me, so many sons of mine hath he slain in their prime.
4584. Yet for them all I mourn not so much, despite my grief, as for one only, sharp grief for whom will bring me down to the house of Hades — even for Hector.
4585. Ah, would he had died in my arms; then had we taken our fill of weeping and wailing, the mother that bare him to her sorrow, and myself.
4586. So spake he weeping, and thereto the townsfolk added their laments.
4587. And among the women of Troy Hecabe led the vehement lamentation:
4588. My child, ah woe is me !
4589. How shall I live in my sore anguish, now thou art dead? —
4590. thou that wast my boast night and day in the city, and a blessing to all, both to the men and women of Troy throughout the town, who ever greeted thee as a god; for verily thou wast to them a glory exceeding great, while yet thou livedst; but now death and fate are come upon thee.
4591. So spake she weeping; but the wife knew naught as yet the wife of Hector — for no true messenger had come to tell her that her husband abode without the gates; but she was weaving a web in the innermost part of the lofty house, a purple web of double fold, and therein was broidering flowers of varied hue.
4592. And she called to her fair - tressed handmaids through the house to set a great tripod on the fire, to the end that there should be a hot bath for Hector whenso he returned from out the battle — unwitting one, neither wist she anywise that far from all baths flashing - eyed Athene had laid him low by the hand of Achilles.
4593. But the shrieks she heard and the groanings from the wall, and her limbs reeled, and from her hand the shuttle fell to earth.
4594. Then she spake again among her fair - tressed handmaids:
4595. Come hither two of you, and follow me, let me see what deeds have been wrought.
4596. It was the voice of my husband's honoured mother that I heard, and in mine own breast my heart leapeth to my mouth, and beneath me my knees are numbed; verily hard at hand is some evil thing for the children of Priam.
4597. Far from my ear be the word, but sorely am I afraid lest to my sorrow goodly Achilles may have cut off from the city bold Hector by himself alone, and have driven him to the plain, aye, and have by now made him to cease from the baneful valour that possessed him; seeing he would never abide in the throng of men, but would ever charge far to the front, yielding to no man in his might.
4598. So saying she hasted through the hall with throbbing heart as one beside herself, and with her went her handmaidens.
4599. But when she was come to the wall and the throng of men, then on the wall she stopped and looked, and was ware of him as he was dragged before the city; and swift horses were dragging him ruthlessly toward the hollow ships of the Achaeans.
4600. Then down over her eyes came the darkness of night, and enfolded her, and she fell backward and gasped forth her spirit.
4601. Far from off her head she cast the bright attiring thereof, the frontlet and coif and kerchief and woven band, and the veil that golden Aphrodite had given her on the day when Hector of the flashing helm hed her as his bride forth from the house of Eetion, after he had brought bride- gifts past counting.
4602. And round about her came thronging ber husband's sisters and his brothers' wives, who bare her up in their midst, distraught even unto death.
4603. But when she revived, and her spirit was returned into her breast, then she lifted up her voice in wailing, and spake among the women of Troy: Ah Hector, woe is me !
4604. to one fate, it seemeth, were we born, both of us twain, thou in Troy in the house of Priam, and I in Thebe beneath wooded Placus in the house of Eetion, who reared me when I was a babe, hapless father of a cruel - fated child; would God he had never begotten me.
4605. Now thou unto the house of Hades beneath the deeps of earth art departing, but me thou leavest in bitter grief, a widow in thy halls, and thy son is still a mere babe, the son born of thee and me in our haplessness; nor shalt thou be any profit to him, Hector, seeing thou art dead, neither he to thee.
4606. For even though he escape the woeful war of the Achaeans, yet shall his portion be labour and sorrow in the aftertime, for others will take away his lands.
4607. The day of orphanhood cutteth a child off from the friends of his youth; ever is his head bowed how, and his cheeks are bathed in tears, and in his need the child hieth him to his father's friends, plucking one by the cloak and another by the tunic; and of them that are touched with pity, one holdeth forth his cup for a moment: his hips he wetteth, but his palate he wetteth not.
4608. And one whose father and mother yet live thrusteth him from the feast with smiting of the hand, and chideth him with words of reviling: ‘
4609. Get thee gone, even as thou art !
4610. No father of thine feasteth in our company.’
4611. Then in tears unto his widowed mother cometh back the child —
4612. Astyanax, that aforetime on his father's knees ate only marrow and the rich fat of sheep; and when sleep came upon him and he ceased from his childish play, then would he slumber on a couch in the arms of his nurse in his soft bed, his heart satisfied with good things.
4613. But now, seeing he has lost his dear father, he will suffer ills full many — my Astyanax, whom the Troians call by this name for that thou alone didst save their gates and their high walls.
4614. But now by the beaked ships far from thy parents shall writhing worms devour thee, when the dogs have had their fill, as thou liest a naked corpse; yet in thy halls lieth raiment, finely - woven and fair, wrought by the hands of women.
4615. Howbeit all these things will I verily burn in blazing fire — in no wise a profit unto thee, seeing thou shalt not lie therein, but to be an honour unto thee from the men and women of Troy.
4616. So spake she weeping, and thereto the women added their laments.
4617. Thus they made lamentation throughout the city; but the Achaeans, when they were come to the ships and the Hellespont, scattered each man to his own ship; howbeit the Myrmidons would Achilles nowise suffer to be scattered, but spake among his war-loving comrades, saying:
4618. Ye Myrmidons of fleet steeds, my trusty comrades, let us not yet loose our single - hooved horses from their cars, but with horses and chariots let us draw nigh and mourn Patroclus; for that is the due of the dead.
4619. Then when we have taken our fill of dire lamenting, we will unyoke our horses and sup here all together.
4620. So spake he, and they raised the voice of wailing all with one accord, and Achilles was leader thereof.
4621. Then thrice about the corpse they drave their fair - maned steeds, mourning the while; and among them Thetis roused desire of wailing.
4622. Wetted were the sands and wetted the armour of the warriors with their tears; so mighty a deviser of rout was he for whom they mourned.
4623. And among them the son of Peleus was leader in the vehement lamentation; laying his man-slaying hands upon the breast of his comrade:
4624. Hail, I bid thee, O Patroclus, even in the house of Hades, for even now I am bringing to fulfillment all that aforetime I promised thee: that I would drag Hector hither and give him raw unto dogs to devour, and of twelve glorious sons of the Trojans would I cut the throats before thy pyre, in my wrath at thy slaying.
4625. He spake, and devised foul entreatment for goodly Hector, stretching him on his face in the dust before the bier of the son of Menoetius.
4626. And they put off, each man of them, their shining harnesses of bronze, and loosed their loud - neighing horses, and themselves sat down beside the ship of the swift - footed son of Aeacus, a countless host; and he made them a funeral feast to satisfy their hearts.
4627. Many sleek bulls bellowed about the knife, as they were slaughtered, many sheep and bleating goats, and many white - tusked swine, rich with fat, were stretched to singe over the flame of Hephaestus; and everywhere about the corpse the blood ran so that one might dip cups therein.
4628. But the prince, the swiftfooted son of Peleus, was led unto goodly Agamemnon by the chiefs of the Achaeans, that had much ado to persuade him thereto, so wroth at heart was he for his comrade.
4629. But when, as they went, they were come to the hut of Agamemnon, forthwith they bade clear-voiced heralds set upon the fire a great cauldron, if so be they might persuade the son of Peleus to wash from him the bloody gore.
4630. But he steadfastly denied them, and swore an oath thereto: Nay, verily by Zeus, that is highest and best of gods, it may not be that water should come nigh my head, until such time as I have laid Patroclus on the fire, and have heaped him a barrow, and shorn my hair withal, since never more shall a second grief thus reach my heart, while yet I abide among the living.
4631. Howbeit for this present let us yield us to the banquet we needs must loathe; but in the morning rouse thou the folk, king of men Agamemnon, to bring wood, and to make ready all that it beseemeth a dead man to have, whenso he goeth beneath the murky darkness, to the end that unwearied fire may burn him quickly from sight, and the host betake it to its tasks.
4632. So spake he, and they readily hearkened to him and obeyed, and speedily making ready each man his meal they supped, nor did thelr hearts lack aught of the equal feast.
4633. But when they had put from them the desire of food and drink, they went each man to his hut to take his rest; but the son of Peleus upon the shore of the loud - resounding sea lay groaning heavily amid the host of the Myrmidons, in an open space where the waves splashed upon the shore.
4634. And when sleep seized him, loosenlng the cares of his heart, being shed in sweetness round about him — for sore weary were his glorious limbs with speeding after Hector unto windy Ilios — then there came to him the spirit of hapless Patroclus, in all things like his very self, in stature and fair eyes and in voice, and in like raiment was he clad withal; and he stood above Achilles' head and spake to him, saying:
4635. Thou sleepest, and hast forgotten me, Achilles.
4636. Not in my life wast thou unmindful of me, but now in my death !
4637. Bury me with all speed, that I pass within the gates of Hades.
4638. Afar do the spirits keep me aloof, the phantoms of men that have done with toils, neither suffer they me to join myself to them beyond the River, but vainly I wander through the wide - gated house of Hades.
4639. And give me thy hand, I pitifully entreat thee, for never more again shall I come back from out of Hades, when once ye have given me my due of fire.
4640. Never more in life shall we sit apart from our dear comrades and take counsel together, but for me hath loathly fate opened its maw, the fate that was appointed me even from my birth.
4641. Aye, and thou thyself also, Achilles like to the gods, art doomed to be brought low beneath the wall of the waelthy Trojans.
4642. And another thing will I speak, and charge thee, if so be thou wilt hearken.
4643. Lay not my bones apart from thine, Achilles, but let them lie together, even as we were reared in your house, when Menoetius brought me, being yet a little lad, from Opoeis to your country, by reason of grievous man-slaying, on the day when I slew Amphidamus' son in my folly, though I willed it not, in wrath over the dice.
4644. Then the knight Peleus received me into his house and reared me with kindly care and named me thy squire; even so let one coffer enfold our bones, a golden coffer with handles twain, the which thy queenly mother gave thee.
4645. Then in answer spake to him Achilles, swift of foot: Wherefore, O head beloved, art thou come hither, and thus givest me charge about each thing?
4646. Nay, verily I will fulfill thee all, and will hearken even as thou biddest.
4647. But, I pray thee, draw thou nigher; though it be but for a little space let us clasp our arms one about the other, and take our fill of dire lamenting.
4648. So saying he reached forth with his hands, yet clasped him not; but the spirit like a vapour was gone beneath the earth, gibbering faintly.
4649. And seized with amazement Achilles sprang up, and smote his hands together, and spake a word of wailing:
4650. Look you now, even in the house of Hades is the spirit and phantom somewhat, albeit the mind be not anywise therein; for the whole night long hath the spirit of hapless Patroclus stood over me, weeping and wailing, and gave me charge concerning each thing, and was wondrously like his very self.
4651. So spake he, and in them all aroused the desire of lament, and rosy-fingered Dawn shone forth upon them while yet they wailed around the piteous corpse.
4652. But the lord Agamemnon sent forth mules an men from all sides from out the huts to fetch wood and a man of valour watched thereover, even Meriones, squire of kindly Idomeneus.
4653. And they went forth bearing in their hands axes for the cutting of wood and well - woven ropes, and before them went the mules: and ever upward, downward, sideward, and aslant they fared.
4654. But when they were come to the spurs of many - fountained Ida, forthwith they set them to fill high - crested oaks with the long - edged bronze in busy haste and with a mighty crash the trees kept falling.
4655. Then the Achaeans split the trunks asunder and bound them behind the mules, and these tore up the earth with their feet as they hasted toward the plain through the thick underbrush.
4656. And all the woodcutters bare logs; for so were they bidden of Meriones, squire of kindly Idomeneus.
4657. Then down upon the shore they cast these, man after man, where Achilles planned a great barrow for Patroclus and for himself.
4658. But when on all sides they had cast down the measureless wood, they sate them down there and abode, all in one throng.
4659. And Achilles straightway bade the war-loving Myrmidons gird them about with bronze, and yoke each man his horses to his car.
4660. And they arose and did on their armour and mounted their chariots, warriors and charioteers alike.
4661. In front fared the men in chariots, and thereafter followed a cloud of footmen, a host past counting and in the midst his comrades bare Patroclus.
4662. And as with a garment they wholly covered the corpse with their hair that they shore off and cast thereon; and behind them goodly Achilles clasped the head, sorrowing the while; for peerless was the comrade whom he was speeding to the house of Hades.
4663. But when they were come to the place that Achilles had appointed unto them, they set down the dead, and swiftly heaped up for him abundant store of wood.
4664. Then again swift - footed goodly Achilles took other counsel; he took his stand apart from the fire and shore off a golden lock, the rich growth whereof he had nursed for the river Spercheüs, and his heart mightily moved, he spake, with a look over the wine - dark sea: Spercheüs, to no purpose did my father Peleus vow to thee that when I had come home thither to my dear native land, I would shear my hair to thee and offer a holy hecatomb, and on the selfsame spot would sacrifice fifty rams, males without blemish, into thy waters, where is thy demesne and thy fragrant altar.
4665. So vowed that old man, but thou didst not fulfill for him his desire.
4666. Now, therefore, seeing I go not home to my dear native land, I would fain give unto the warrior Patroclus this lock to fare with him.
4667. He spake and set the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and in them all aroused the desire of lament.
4668. And now would the light of the sun have gone down upon their weeping, had not Achilles drawn nigh to Agamemnon's side and said: Son of Atreus — for to thy words as to those of none other will the host of the Achaeans give heed — of lamenting they may verily take their fill, but for this present disperse them from the pyre, and bid them make ready their meal; for all things here we to whom the dead is nearest and dearest will take due care; and with us let the chieftains also abide.
4669. Then when the king of men Agamemnon heard this word, he forthwith dispersed the folk amid the shapely ships, but they that were neareat and dearest to the dead abode there, and heaped up the wood, and made a pyre of an hundred feet this way and that, and on the topmost part thereof they set the dead man, their hearts sorrow - laden.
4670. And many goodly sheep and many sleek kine of shambling gait they flayed and dressed before the pyre; and from them all great-souled Achilles gathered the fat, and enfolded the dead therein from head to foot, and about him heaped the flayed bodies.
4671. And thereon he set two -handled jars of honey and oil, leaning them against the bier; and four horses with high arched neeks he cast swiftly upon the pyre, groaning aloud the while.
4672. Nine dogs had the prince, that fed beneath his table, and of these did Achilles cut the throats of twain, and cast them upon the pyre.
4673. And twelve valiant sons of the great-souled Trojans slew he with the bronze — and grim was the work he purposed in his heart and thereto he set the iron might of fire, to range at large.
4674. Then he uttered a groan, and called on his dear comrade by name:
4675. Hail, I bid thee, O Patroclus, even in the house of Hades, for now am I bringing all to pass, which afore - time I promised thee.
4676. Twelve valiant sons of the great-souled Trojans, lo all these together with thee the flame devoureth; but Hector, son of Priam, will I nowise give to the fire to feed upon, but to dogs.
4677. So spake he threatening, but with Hector might no dogs deal; nay, the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, kept dogs from him by day alike and by night, and with oil anointed she him, rose -sweet, ambrosial, to the end that Achilles might not tear him as he dragged him.
4678. And over him Phoebus Apollo drew a dark cloud from heaven to the plain, and covered all the place whereon the dead man lay, lest ere the time the might of the sun should shrivel his flesh round about on his sinews and limbs.
4679. Howbeit the pyre of dead Patroclus kindled not.
4680. Then again did swift footed goodly
4681. Achilles take other counsel; he took his stand apart from the pyre, and made prayer to the two winds, to the North Wind and the West Wind, and promised fair offerings, and full earnestly, as he poured libations from a cup of gold, he besought them to come, to the end that the corpses might speedily blaze with fire, and the wood make haste to be kindled.
4682. Then forthwith Iris heard his prayer, and hied her with the message to the winds.
4683. They in the house of the fierce - blowing West Wind were feasting all together at the banquet and Iris halted from her running on the threshold of stone.
4684. Soon as their eyes beheld her, they all sprang up and called her each one to himself.
4685. But she refused to sit, and spake saying: I may not sit, for I must go back unto the streams of Oceanus, unto the land of the Ethiopians, where they are sacrificing hecatombs to the immortals, that I too may share in the sacred feast.
4686. But Achilles prayeth the North Wind and the noisy West Wind to come, and promiseth them fair offerings, that so ye may rouse the pyre to burn whereon lieth Patroclus, for whom all the Achaeans groan aloud.
4687. When she had thus departed, and they arose with a wondrous din, driving the clouds tumultuously before them.
4688. And swiftly they came to the sea to blow thereon, and the wave swelled beneath the shrill blast; and they came to deep- soiled Troyland, and fell upon the pyre, and mightily roared the wordrous blazing fire.
4689. So the whole night long as with one blast they beat upon the flame of the pyre, blowing shrill; and the whole night long swift Achilles, taking a two -handled cup in hand, drew wine from a golden howl and poured it upon the earth, and wetted the ground, calling ever upon the spirit of hapless Patroclus.
4690. As a father waileth for his son, as he burneth his bones, a son newly wed whose death has brought woe to his hapless parents, even so wailed Achilles for his comrade as he burned his bones, going heavily about the pyre with ceaseless groaning.
4691. But at the hour when the star of morning goeth forth to herald light over the face of the earth — the star after which followeth saffron - robed Dawn and spreadeth over the sea —even then grew the burning faint, and the flame thereof died down.
4692. And the winds went back again to return to their home over the Thracian sea, and it roared with surging flood.
4693. Then the son of Peleus withdrew apart from the burning pyre, and laid him down sore - wearied; and sweet sleep leapt upon him.
4694. But they that were with the son of Atreus gathered in a throng, and the noise and din of their oncoming aroused him; and he sat upright and spake to them saying:
4695. Son of Atreus, and ye other princes of the hosts of Achaea, first quench ye with flaming wine the burning pyre, even all whereon the might of the fire hath come, and thereafter let us gather the bones of Patroclus, Menoetius' son, singling them out well from the rest; and easy they are to discern, for he lay in the midst of the pyre, while the others burned apart on the edges thereof, horses and men mingled together.
4696. Then let us place the bones in a golden urn wrapped in a double layer of fat until such time as I myself be hidden in Hades.
4697. Howbeit no huge barrow do I bid you rear with toil for him, but such a one only as beseemeth; but in aftertime do ye Achaeans build it broad and high, ye that shall be left amid the benched ships when I am gone.
4698. So spake he, and they hearkened to the swift - footed son of Peleus.
4699. First they quenched with flaming wine the pyre, so far as the flame had come upon it, and the ash had settled deep; and with weeping they gathered up the white bones of their gentle comrade into a golden urn, and wrapped them in a double layer of fat, and placing the urn in the hut they covered it with a soft linen cloth.
4700. Then they traced the compass of the barrow and set forth the foundations thereof round about the pyre, and forthwith they piled the up- piled earth.
4701. And when they had piled the barrow, they set them to go back again.
4702. But Achilles stayed the folk even where they were, and made them to sit in a wide gathering; and from his ships brought forth prizes; cauldrons and tripods and horses and mules and strong oxen and fair - girdled women and grey iron.
4703. For swift charioteers first he set forth goodly prizes, a woman to lead away, one skilled in goodly handiwork, and an eared tripod of two and twenty measures for him that should be first; and for the second he appointed a mare of six years, unbroken, with a mule foal in her womb; and for the third he set forth a cauldron untouched of fire, a fair cauldron that held four measures, white even as the first; and for the fourth he appointed two talents of gold; and for the fifth a two -handled urn, yet untouched of fire.
4704. Then he stood up, and spake among the Argives, saying: Son of Atreus, and ye other well - greaved Achaeans, for the charioteers these prizes lie waiting in the lists.
4705. If for some other's honour we Achaeans were now holding contests, surely it were I that should win the first prize, and bear it to my hut; for ye know how far my horses twain surpass in excellence, seeing they are immortal, and it was Poseidon that gave them to my father Peleus, and he gave them to me.
4706. Howbeit I verily will abide, I and my single - hooved horses, so valiant and glorious a charioteer have they lost, and one so kind, who full often would pour upon their manes soft soil when he had washed them in bright water.
4707. For him they stand and mourn, and on the ground their manes are trailing, and the twain stand there, grieving at heart.
4708. But do ye others make yourselves ready throughout the host, whosoever of the Achaeans hath trust in his horses and his jointed car.
4709. So spake the son of Peleus, and the swift charioteers bestirred them.
4710. Upsprang, for the first, Eumelus, king of men, Admetus' dear son, a man well - skilled in horsemanship and after him upsprang Tydeus' son, mighty Diomedes, and led beneath the yoke the horses of Tros, even them that on a time he had taken from Aeneas, albeit Apollo snatched away Aeneas' self; and after him uprose Atreus' son, fair - haired Menelaus, sprung from Zeus, and led beneath the yoke swift steeds, Aethe, Agamemnon's mare, and his own horse Podargus.
4711. The mare had Anchises' son Echepolus given to Agamemnon without price, to the end that he might not follow him to windy Ilios, but might abide at home and take his joy; for great wealth had Zeus given him, and he dwelt in spaclous Sicyon: her Menelaus led beneath the yoke, and exceeding fain was she of the race.
4712. And fourth Antilochus made ready his fair - maned horses, he the peerless son of Nestor, the king high of heart, the son of Neleus; and bred at Pylos were the swift - footed horses that drew his car.
4713. And his father drew nigh and gave counsel to him for his profit — a wise man to one that himself had knowledge.
4714. Antilochus, for all thou art young, yet have Zeus and Poseidon loved thee and taught thee all manner of horsemanship; wherefore to teach thee is no great need, for thou knowest well how to wheel about the turning - post; yet are thy horses slowest in the race: therefore I deem there will be sorry work for thee.
4715. The horses of the others are swifter, but the men know not how to devise more cunning counsel than thine own self.
4716. Wherefore come, dear son, lay thou up in thy mind cunning of every sort, to the end that the prizes escape thee not.
4717. By cunning, thou knowest, is a woodman far better than by might; by cunning too doth a helmsman on the wine - dark deep guide aright a swift ship that is buffeted by winds; and by cunning doth charioteer prove better than charioteer.
4718. Another man, trusting in his horses and car, heedlessly wheeleth wide to this side and that, and his horses roam over the course, neither keepeth he them in hand; whereas he that hath crafty mind, albeit he drive worse horses, keepeth his eye ever on the turning - post and wheeleth close thereby, neither is unmindful how at the first to force his horses with the oxhide reins, but keepeth them ever in hand, and watcheth the man that leadeth him in the race.
4719. Now will I tell thee a manifest sign that will not escape thee.
4720. There standeth, as it were a fathom's height above the ground, a dry stump, whether of oak or of pine, which rotteth not in the rain, and two white stones on either side thereof are firmly set against it at the joinings of the course, and about it is smooth ground for driving.
4721. Haply it is a monnment of some man long ago dead, or haply was made the turning - post of a race in days of men of old; and now hath switft- footed goodly Achilles appointed it his turningpost.
4722. Pressing hard thereon do thou drive close thy chariot and horses, and thyself lean in thy well - plaited car a little to the left of the pair, and to the off horse do thou give the goad, calling to him with a shout, and give him rein from thy hand.
4723. But to the post let the near horse draw close, that the nave of the well - wrought wheel seem to graze the surface thereof — but be thou ware of touching the stone, lest haply thou wound thy horses and wreck thy car; so should there be joy for the rest, but reproach it for thyself.
4724. Nay, dear son, be thou wise and on thy guard; for if at the turning - post thou shalt drive past the rest in thy course, there is no man that shall catch thee by a burst of speed, neither pass thee by, nay, not though in pursuit he were driving goodly Arion, the swift horse of Adrastus, that was of heavenly stock, or those of Laomedon, the goodly breed of this land.
4725. So saying Nestor, son of Neleus, sate him down again in his place, when he had told his son the sum of every matter.
4726. And fifth Meriones made ready his fair - maned horses.
4727. Then they mounted their cars, and cast in the lots; and Achilles shook them, and forth leapt the lot of Nestor's son, Antilochus; after him had the lord Eumelus a place, and next to him Atreus' son, Menelaus, famed for his spear, and next to him Meriones drew his place; and last of all the son of Tydeus, albeit far the best, drew a place for his chariot.
4728. Then took they their places in a row, and Achilles shewed them the turning - post afar off in the smooth plain; and thereby he set as an umpire godlike Phoenix, his father's follower, that he might mark the running and tell the truth thereof.
4729. Then they all at one moment lifted the lash each above his yoke of horses, and smote them with the reins, and called to them with words, full eagerly and forthwith they sped swiftly over the plain away from the ships and beneath their breasts the dust arose and stood, as it were a cloud or a whirlwind, and their manes streamed on the blasts of the wind.
4730. And the chariots would now course over the bounteous earth, and now again would bound on high; and they that drave stood in the cars, and each man's heart was athrob as they strove for victory; and they called every man to his horses, that flew in the dust over the plain.
4731. But when now the swift horses were fulfilling the last stretch of the course, back toward the grey sea, then verily was made manifest the worth of each, and the pace of their horses was forced to the uttermost.
4732. And forthwith the swift - footed mares of the son of Pheres shot to the front, and after them Diomedes' stallions of the breed of Tros; not far behind were they, but close behind, for they seemed ever like to mount upon Eumelus' car, and with their breath his back waxed warm and his broad shoulders, for right over him did they lean their heads as they flew along.
4733. And now would Tydeus' son have passed him by or left the issue in doubt, had not Phoebus Apollo waxed wroth with him and smitten from his hand the shining lash.
4734. Then from his eyes ran tears in his wrath for that he saw the mares coursing even far swiftlier still than before, while his own horses were hampered, as running without goad.
4735. But Athene was not unaware of Apollo's cheating of the son of Tydeus, and right swiftly sped she after the shepherd of the host, and gave him back the lash and put strength into his horses.
4736. Then in wrath was she gone after the son of Admetus, and the goddess brake the yoke of his steeds, and to his cost the mares swerved to this side and that of the course, and the pole was swung to the earth; and Eumelus himself was hurled from out the car beside the wheel, and from his elbows and his mouth and nose the skin was stripped, and his forehead above his brows was bruised; and both his eyes were filled with tears and the flow of his voice was checked.
4737. Then Tydeus' son turned his single - hooved horses aside and drave on, darting out far in advance of the rest; for Athene put strength in his horses and gave glory to himself.
4738. And after him drave the son of Atreus, fair - haired Menelaus.
4739. But Antilochus called to the horses of his father:
4740. Go in now, ye twain as well; strain to your utmost speed.
4741. With yon steeds verily I nowise bid you strive, with the horses of wise - hearted Tydeus to the which Athene hath now given speed and vouchsafed glory to him that driveth them.
4742. But the horses of the son of Atreus do ye overtake with speed, and be not outstripped of them, lest shame be shed on you by Aethe that is but a mare.
4743. Why are ye outstripped, good steeds?
4744. For thus will I speak out to you, and verily it shall be brought to pass: no tendance shall there be for you twain with Nestor, the shepherd of the host, but forthwith will he slay you with the sharp bronze, if through your heedlessness we win but a worse prize.
4745. Nay, have after them with all speed ye may, and this will I myself contrive and plan, that we slip past them in the narrow way; it shall not escape me.
4746. So spake he, and they, seized with fear at the rebuke of their master, ran swiftlier on for a little time, and then quickly did Antilochus, staunch in fight, espy a narrow place in the hollow road.
4747. A rift there was in the ground, where the water, swollen by winter rains, had broken away a part of the road and had hollowed all the place.
4748. There drave Menelaus in hope that none other might drive abreast of him.
4749. But Antilochus turned aside his single - hooved horses, and drave on outside the track, and followed after him, a little at one side.
4750. And the son of Atreus was seized with fear, and shouted to Antilochus: Antilochus, thou art driving recklessly; nay, rein in thy horses !
4751. Here is the way straitened, but presently it will be wider for passing; lest haply thou work harm to us both by fouling my car.
4752. So spake he, but Antilochus drave on even the more hotly, and plied the goad, as he were one that heard not.
4753. And far is the range of a discus swung from the shoulder, which a young man hurleth, making trial of his strength, even so far ran they on; but the mares of the son of Atreus gave back, for of his own will he forbare to urge them, lest haply the single - hooved horses should clash together in the track, and overturn the well - plaited cars, and themselves be hurled in the dust in their eager haste for victory.
4754. Then fair - haired Menelaus chid Antilochus, and said: Antilochus, than thou is none other of mortals more malicious.
4755. Go, and perdition take thee, since falsely did we Achaeans deem thee wise.
4756. Howbeit even so shalt thou not bear off the prize without an oath.
4757. So said he, and called to his horses, saying:
4758. Hold not back, I bid you, neither stand ye still with grief at heart.
4759. Their feet and knees will grow weary before yours, for they both are lacking in youth.
4760. So spake be, and they, seized with fear at the rebuke of their master, ran swiftlier on, and quickly came close anigh the others.
4761. But the Argives sitting in the place of gathering were gazing at the horses, that flew amid the dust over the plain.
4762. And the first to mark them was Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, for he sat without the gathering, the highest of all, in a place of outlook, and when he heard the voice of him that shouted, albeit afar off, he knew it; and he was ware of a horse, shewing clear to view in front, one that was a bay all the rest of him, but on his forehead was a white spot round like the moon.
4763. And he stood up, and spake among the Argives saying:
4764. My friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, is it I alone that discern the horses, or do ye as well?
4765. Other are they, meseemeth, that be now in front, and other is the charioteer that appeareth; and the mares will have come to harm out yonder on the plain, they that were in front on the outward course.
4766. For in truth I marked them sweeping first about the turning - post, but now can I nowhere spy them, though mine eyes glance everywhither over the Trojan plain, as I gaze.
4767. Did the reins haply slip from the charioteer, and was he unable to guide the course aright about the post, and did he fail in the turn?
4768. Even there, methinks, must he have been hurled to earth, and have wrecked his car, and the mares must have swerved from the course in wild terror of heart.
4769. Howbeit stand ye up also, and look; for myself I discern not clearly, but the man seemeth to me to be an Aetolian by race, and is king among the Argives, even the son of horse - taming Tydeus, mighty Diomedes.
4770. Then shamefully chid him swift Aias, son of Oïleus: Idomeneus, why art thou a braggart from of old?
4771. Nay, still afar off are the high -stepping mares speeding over the wide plain.
4772. Neither art thou so far the youngest among the Argives, nor do thine eyes look forth from thy head so far the keenliest yet thou ever pratest loudly.
4773. It beseemeth thee not to be loud of speech, for here be others better than thou.
4774. The selfsame mares are in the lead, that led of old, even they of Eumelus, and himself he standeth firmly in the car and holdeth the reins.
4775. Then the leader of the Cretans waxed wroth, and spake in answer: Aias, thou master of railing, witless in counsel, in all things else thou fallest behind the other Argives, for thy mind is stubborn.
4776. Come now, let us wager a tripod or a cauldron, and as umpire betwixt us twain let us choose Atreus' son Agamemnon, as to which mares are in the lead — that thou mayst learn by paying the price.
4777. So spake he, and forthwith uprose in wrath swift Aias, son of Oïleus, to answer him with angry words; and yet furthur would the strife between the twain have gone, had not Achilles himself stood up, and spoken, saying:
4778. No longer now, O Aias and Idomeneus, answer ye one another with angry words, with evil words, for that were unseemly.
4779. Ye have indignation with another, whoso should act thus.
4780. Nay, sit ye down in the place of gathering, and watch ye the horses; full soon in their eager haste for victory will they come hither, and then shall ye know, each man of you, the horses of the Argives, which be behind, and which in the lead.
4781. So spake he, and Tydeus' son came hard anigh as he drave, and with his lash dealt many a stroke down from the shoulder; and his horses leapt on high as they swiftly sped on their way.
4782. And ever did flakes of dust smite the charioteer, and his chariot overlaid with gold and tin ran on behind the swift - footed horses, and small trace there was of the wheel tires behind in the light dust, as the twain flew speeding on.
4783. Then he drew up in the midst of the place of gathering, and in streams the sweat flowed from the necks and chests of the horses to the ground.
4784. And Diomedes himself leapt to the ground from his gleaming car, and leaned the goad against the yoke.
4785. Neither did mighty Sthenelus anywise tarry, but speedily took the prize, and gave to his comrades, high of heart, the woman and the eared tripod to bear away; and himself loosed the horses from beneath the yoke.
4786. And next after him Antilochus of the stock of Neleus drave his horses, for that by guile, and nowise by speed, had he outstripped Menelaus; howbeit even so Menelaus guided his swift horses close behind.
4787. Far as a horse is from the wheel, a horse that draweth his master over the plain, and straineth at the car — the tire thereof do the hindmost hairs of his tail touch, for it runneth close behind, and but scant space is there between, as he courseth over the wide plain — even by so much was Menelaus behind peerless Antilochus, though at the first he was behind far as a man hurleth the discus; howbeit quickly was he overtaking Antilochus, for the goodly mettle of the mare of Agamemnon, fair - maned Aethe, waxed ever higher.
4788. And if the course had been yet longer for the twain, then had he passed him by, neither left the issue in doubt.
4789. But Meriones, valiant squire of Idomeneus, was a spear - cast behind glorious Menelaus, for slowest of all were his fair - maned horses, and himself least skilled to drive a chariot in the race.
4790. And the son of Admetus came in last, behind all the rest, dragging his fair chariot and driving his horses before him.
4791. And at sight of him swift - footed, goodly Achilles had pity and he stood up amid the Argives, and spake winged words:
4792. Lo, in the last place driveth his single - hooved horses the man that is far the best.
4793. But come, let us give him a prize, as is meet, a prize for the second place; but the first let the son of Tydeus bear away.
4794. So spake he, and they all assented even as he bade.
4795. And now would he have given him the mare — for the Achaeans assented thereto — but that Antilochus, son of great - souled Nestor, uprose and answered Achilles, son of Peleus, to claim his due: Achilles, sore wroth shall I be with thee if thou fulfill this word, for thou art minded to rob me of my prize, bethinking thee of this, how his chariot and his swift honses came to harm, and himself withal, good man though he be.
4796. Nay, he should have made prayer to the immortals, then had he nowise come in last of all in the race.
4797. But if so be thou pitiest him, and he be dear to thy heart, lo, in thy hut is great store of gold, and bronze is there and sheep, aye, and handmaids too, and single - hooved horses.
4798. Thereof do thou hereafter take and give him even a goodlier prize, or even now forthwith, that the Achaeans may applaud thee.
4799. But the mare will not yield; for her let any man that will, essay to do battle with me by might of hand.
4800. So spake he, and swift - footed, goodly Achilles smiled, having joy in Antilochus, for that he was his dear comrade; and he made answer, and spake to him winged words: Antilochus, if thou wilt have men give to Eumelus some other thing from out my house as a further prize, even this will I do.
4801. I will give him the corselet that I took from Asteropaeus; of bronze is it, and thereon is set in circles a casting of bright tin, and it shall be to him a thing of great worth.
4802. He spake, and bade his dear comrade Automedon bring it from the hut and he went and brought it, and placed it in Eumelus' hands and he received it gladly.
4803. Then among them uprose also Menelaus, sore vexed at heart, furiously wroth at Antilochus; and a herald gave the staff into his hand, and proclaimed silence among the Argives; and thereafter spake among them the godlike man: Antilochus, thou that aforetime wast wise, what a thing hast thou wrought !
4804. Thou hast put my skill to shame and hast thwarted my horses, thrusting to the front thine own that were worser far.
4805. Come now, ye leaders and rulers of the Argives, judge ye aright betwixt us twain, neither have regard unto either, lest in aftertime some one of the brazen - coated Achaeans shall say: ‘ Over Antilochus did Menelaus prevail by lies, and depart with the mare, for that his horses were worser far, but himself the mightier in worth and in power.’
4806. Nay, but I will myself declare the right, and I deem that none other of the Danaans shall reproach me, for my judgement shall be just.
4807. Antilochus, fostered of Zeus, up, come thou hither and, as is the appointed way, stand thou before thy horses and chariot, and take in hand the slender lash with which aforetimethou wast wont to drive, and laying thy hand on thy horses swear by him that holdeth and shaketh the earth that not of thine own will didst thou hinder my chariot by guile.
4808. Then in turn wise Antilochus answered him: Bear with me, now, for far younger am I than thou, king Menelaus, and thou art the elder and the better man.
4809. Thou knowest of what sort are the transgressions of a man that he is young, for hasty is he of purpose and but slender is his wit.
4810. Wherefore let thy heart be patient; the mare that I have won will I give thee of my self.
4811. Aye, and if thou shouldst ask some other goodlier thing from out my house, forthwith were I fain to give it thee out of hand, rather than all my days be cast out of thy heart, thou nurtured of Zeus, and be a sinner in the eyes of the gods.
4812. So spake the son of great-souled Nestor, and led up the mare, and gave her into the hands of Menelaus.
4813. And his heart was gladdened even as the corn when with the dew upon the ears it waxeth ripe, what time the fields are bristling.
4814. In such wise, Menelaus, was thy heart gladdened in thy breast.
4815. Then he spake winged words unto Antilochos, saying: Antilochus, lo now, I of myself cease from mine anger against thee, since nowise flighty or light of wit wast thou of old, albeit now hath thy youth got the better of thy reason.
4816. Another time seek not to outwit thy betters.
4817. Verily not soon should another of the Achaeans have persuaded me, but thou hast suffered greatly and toiled greatly, thou and thy brave father and thy brother, for my sake; wherefore I will hearken to thy prayer, aye, and will give unto thee the mare, for all she is mine own, to the end that these too may know that my heart is never over- haughty neither unbending.
4818. He spake, and gave the mare unto Nosmon, the comrade of Antilochus, to lead away, and himself thereafter took the shining cauldron.
4819. And Meriones took up the two talents of gold in the fourth place, even as he drave; but the fifth prize was left unclaimed, even the two -handled urn.
4820. Unto Nestor Achilles gave this, bearing it through the gathering of the Argives; and he came to his side, and said Take this now, old sire, and let it be treasure for thee, a memorial of Patroclus' burying; for nevermore shalt thou behold him among the Argives.
4821. Lo, I give thee this prize unwon; for not in boxing shalt thou contend, neither in wrestling, nor shalt thou enter the lists for the casting of javelins, neither run upon thy feet; for now grievous old age weigheth heavy upon thee.
4822. So saying he placed the urn in his arms, and Nestor received it gladly, and spake, and addressed him with winged words:
4823. Aye, verily, my son, all this hast thou spoken aright, for my limbs, even my feet, are no more firm, O my friend, as of old, nor do my arms as of old dart out lightly from my shoulders on either side.
4824. Would that I were young, and my strength were firm as on the day when the Epeians were burying lord Amarynceus at Buprasium, and his sons appointed prizes in honour of the king.
4825. Then was there no man that proved himself my peer, neither of the Epeians nor of Pylians themselves nor of the great-souled Aetolians.
4826. In boxing I overcame Clytomedes, son of Enops, and in wrestling Ancaeus of Pleuron, who stood up against me; Iphiclus I outran in the foot -race, good man though he was; and in casting the spear I outthrew Phyleus and Polydorus.
4827. In the chariot race alone the twain sons of Actor outstripped me by force of numbers crowding their horses to the front, being exceeding jealous for victory, for that the goodliest prize abode yet there in the lists.
4828. Twin brethren were they — the one drave with sure hand, drave with sure hand, while the other plied the goad.
4829. Thus was I on a time, but now let men that be younger face such - like tasks; me it behoveth to yield to grievous old age, but then was I pre-eminent among warriors.
4830. But come, for thy comrade too hold thou funeral rites with contests.
4831. For this gift, I receive it with gladness, and my heart rejoiceth that thou rememberest me, thy friend, neither am I forgotten of thee, and the honour wherewith it beseemeth that I be honoured among the Achaeans.
4832. And to thee may the gods in requital thereof grant grace to satisfy thy heart.
4833. So spake he, and the son of Peleus went his way through the great throng of the Achaeans, when he had hearkened to all the praise of the son of Neleus.
4834. Then set he forth prizes for grievous boxing.
4835. A sturdy mule he brought and tethered in the place of gathering, a mule of six years, unbroken, the which is hardest of all to break; and for him that should be worsted he appointed a two -handled cup.
4836. Then he stood up, and spake among the Argives, saying: Son of Atreus, and ye other well - greaved Achaeans, for these prizes we invite warriors twain, the best there are, to lift up their hands and box amain.
4837. Let him to whom Apollo shall grant strength to endure, and all the Achaeans have knowledge thereof, go his way to his hut leading the sturdy mu
4838. Ie; but he that is worsted shall bear as his prize the two -handled cup.
4839. So spake he, and forthwith uprose a man valiant and tall, well - skilled in boxing, even Epeius, son of Panopeus; and he laid hold of the sturdy mule, and spake, saying:
4840. Let him draw nigh, whoso is to bear as his prize the two -handled cup: the mule I deem that none other of the Achaeans shall lead away, by worsting me with his fists, for I avow me to be the best man.
4841. Sufficeth it not that I fall short in battle?
4842. One may not, meseemeth, prove him a man of skill in every work.
4843. For thus will I speak, and verily this thing shall be brought to pass: utterly will I rend his flesh and crush his bones.
4844. Wherefore let them that be next of kin abide here in a throng, that they may bear him forth when worsted by my hands.
4845. So spake he, and they all became hushed in silence.
4846. Euryalus alone uprose to face him, a godlike man, son of king Mecisteus, son of Talaus, who on a time had come to Thebes for the burial of Oedipus, when he had fallen, and there had worsted all the sons of Cadmus.
4847. And Tydeus' son, famed for his spear, made Euryalus ready, heartening him with words, and much he wished for him victory.
4848. A girdle first he cast about him, and thereafter gave him well - cut thongs of the hide of an ox of the field.
4849. So the twain, when they had girded themselves, stepped into the midst of the place of gathering, and lifting their mighty hands on high one against the other, fell to, and their hands clashed together in heavy blows.
4850. Dread then was the grinding of their teeth, and the sweat flowed on every side from off their limbs
4851. But upon him goodly Epeius rushed as he peered for an opening, and smote him on the cheek, nor after that, methinks, did he long stand upright, for even there did his glorious limbs sink beneath him.
4852. And as when beneath the ripple of the North Wind a fish leapeth up on the tangle - strewn sand of a shallow, and then the black wave hideth it, even so leapt up Euryalus when he was smitten.
4853. But great-souled Epeius took him in his hands and set him on his feet, and his dear comrades thronged about him and led him through the place of gathering with trailing feet, spitting out clotted blood and letting his head hang to one side; and they brought him wandering in his wits and set him down in the midst of their company, and themselves went and fetched the two -handled cup.
4854. Then the son of Peleus forthwith ordained in the sight of the Danaans other prizes for a third contest, even for toilsome wrestling — for him that should win, a great tripod to stand upon the fire, that the Achaeans prized amongst them at the worth of twelve oxen; and for him that should be worsted he set in the midst a woman of manifold skill in handiwork, and they prized her at the worth of four oxen.
4855. And he stood up and spake among the Argives saying:
4856. Up now, ye twain that will make essay likewise in this contest.
4857. So spake he, and thereat arose great Telamonian Aias, and up stood Odysseus of many wiles, he of guileful mind.
4858. Then the twain, when they had girded themselves, stepped into the midst of the place of gathering, and laid hold each of the other in close grip with their mighty hands, even as the gable - rafters of a high house, which some famous craftsman joineth together, that he may have shelter from the might of the winds.
4859. And their backs creaked beneath the violent tugging of bold hands, and the sweat flowed down in streams; and many a weal, red with blood, sprang up along their ribs and shoulders; and ever they strove amain for victory, to win the fashioned tripod.
4860. Neither might Odysseus avail to trip Aias and throw him to the ground, nor Aias him, for the mighty strength of Odysseus held firm.
4861. But when at the last they were like to weary the well - greaved Achaeans, then unto Odysseus spake great Telamonian Aias, saying: Zeus-born, son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, lift thou me, or let me lift thee; but the issue shall rest with Zeus.
4862. He spake, and lifted him; but Odysseus forgat not his guile.
4863. He smote with a sure blow the hollow of Aias' knee from behind, and loosed his limbs, so that he was thrown backward, and Odysseus fell upon his chest; and the people gazed thereon and were seized with wonder.
4864. Then in his turn the much-enduring goodly Odysseus essayed to lift, and moved him a little from the ground, but lifted him not, howbeit he crooked his knee within that of Aias, and upon the ground the twain fell one hard by the other, and were befouled with dust.
4865. And now would they have sprung up again for the third time and have wrestled, but that Achilles himself uprose, and held them back:
4866. No longer strain ye now, neither be worn with pain.
4867. Victory is with you both; take then equa1 prizes and go your ways, that other Achaeans too may strive.
4868. So spake he, and they readily hearkened to him and obeyed, and wiping from their bodies the dust they put upon them their tunics.
4869. Then the son of Peleus straightway set forth other prizes for fleetness of foot: a mixingbowl of silver, richly wrought; six measures it held, and in beauty it was far the goodliest in all the earth, seeing that Sidonians, well skilled in deft handiwork, had wrought it cunningly, and men of the Phoenicians brought it over the murky deep, and landed it in harbour, and gave it as a gift to Thoas; and as a ransom for Lycaon, son of Priam, Jason's son Euneos gave it to the warrior Patroclus.
4870. This bowl did Achilles set forth as a prize in honourof his comrade, even for him whoso should prove fleetest in speed of foot.
4871. For the second again he set an ox great and rich with fat; and a half - talent in gold he appointed for the last.
4872. And he stood up, and spake among the Argives saying:
4873. Up now, ye that will make essay likewise in this contest.
4874. So spake he, and forthwith uprose swift Aias, son of Oïleus, and Odysseus of many wiles, and after them Antilochus, Nestor's son, for he surpassed all the youths in swiftness of foot.
4875. Then took they their places in a row, and Achilles showed them the goal, and a course was marked out for them from the turning - point.
4876. Then speedily the son of Oïleus forged to the front, and close after him sped goodly Odysseus; close as is the weaving - rod to the breast of a fair - girdled woman, when she deftly draweth it in her hands, pulling the spool past the warp, and holdeth the rod nigh to her breast; even so close behind ran Odysseus, and his feet trod in the footsteps of Aias or ever the dust had settled therein, and down upon his head beat the breath of goodly Odysseus, as he ran ever swiftly on; and all the Achaeans shouted to further him as he struggled for victory, and called to him as he strained to the utmost.
4877. But when now they were running the last part of the course, straightway Odysseus made prayer in his heart to flashing - eyed Athene: Hear me, goddess, and come a goodly helper to my feet.
4878. So spake he in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, and made his limbs light, his feet and his hands above.
4879. But when they were now about to dart forth to win the prize, then Aias slipped as he ran — for Athene hampered him — where was strewn the filth from the slaying of the loud bellowing bulls that swift - footed Achilles had slain in honour of Patroclus; and with the filth of the bulls were his mouth and nostrils filled.
4880. So then much-enduring, goodly Odysseus took up the bowl, seeing he came in the first, and glorious Aias took the ox.
4881. And he stood holding in his hands the horn of the ox of the field, spewing forth the filth; and he spake among the Argives:
4882. Out upon it, lo, the goddess hampered me in my running, she that standeth ever by Odysseus' side like a mother, and helpeth him.
4883. So spake he, but they all laughed merrily at him.
4884. Then Antilochus bare away the last prize, smiling the while, and spake among the Argives, saying:
4885. Among you all that know it well, will I declare, my friends, that even to this day the immortals shew honour to older men.
4886. For Aias is but a little older than I, whereas Odysseus is of an earlier generation and of earlier men— a green old age is his, men say — yet hard were he for any other Achaean to contend with in running, save only for Achilles.
4887. So spake he, and gave glory to the son of Peleus, swift of foot.
4888. And Achilles made answer, and spake to him, saying: Antilochus, not in vain shall thy word of praise be spoken; nay, I will add to thy prize a half - talent of gold.
4889. So saying, he set it in his hands, and Antilochus received it gladly.
4890. But the son of Peleus brought and set in the place of gathering a far-shadowing spear, and therewith a shield and helmet, the battlegear of Sarpedon, that Patroclus stripped from him; and he stood up, and spake among the Argives, saying:
4891. To win these prizes invite we warriors twain, the best there are, to clothe them in their armour and take bronze that cleaveth the flesh, and so make trial each of the other before the host.
4892. Whoso of the twain shall first reach the other's fair flesh, and touch the inward parts through armour and dark blood, to him will I give this silver - studded sword — a goodly Thracian sword which I took from Asteropaeus; and these arms let the twain bear away to hold in common; and a goodly banquet shall we set before them in our huts.
4893. So spake he, and thereat arose great Telamonian Aias, and up rose the son of Tydeus, stalwart Diomedes.
4894. So when they had armed them on either side of the throng, into the midst strode the twain, eager for battle, glaring terribly; and amazement held all the Achaeans.
4895. But when they were come near as they advance done against the other, thrice they set upon each other, and thrice they clashed together.
4896. Then Aias thrust upon the shield, that was well - balanced upon every side, but reached not the flesh, for the corselet within kept off the spear.
4897. But Tydeus' son over the great shield sought ever to reach the neck with the point of his shining spear.
4898. Then verily the Achaeans, seized with fear for Aias, bade them cease and take up equal prizes.
4899. Howbeit to Tydeus' son the warrior gave the great sword, bringing it with its scabbard and its well - cut baldric.
4900. Then the son of Peleus set forth a mass of rough - cast iron, which of old the mighty strength of Eëtion was wont to hurl; but him had swift - footed goodly Achilles slain, and bare this away on his ships with his other possessions.
4901. And he stood up, and spake among the Argives, saying:
4902. Up now, ye that will make essay likewise in this contest.
4903. Though his rich fields lie very far remote, the winner hereof will have it five revolving years to serve his need; for not through lack of iron will his shepherd or ploughman fare to the city; nay, this will supply them.
4904. So spake he, and thereat arose Polypoetes, staunch in fight, and the mighty strength of godlike Leonteus, and Aias, son of Telamon, and goodly Epeius.
4905. Then they took their places in order, and goodly Epeius grasped the mass, and whirled and flung it; and all the Achaeans laughed aloud thereat.
4906. Then in turn Leonteus, scion of Ares, made a cast; and thirdly great Telamonian Aias hurled it from his strong hand, and sent it past the marks of all.
4907. But when Polypoetes, staunch in fight, grasped the mass, far as a herdsman flings his crook, and it flieth whirling over the herds of kine, even so far cast he it beyond all the gathering; and the folk shouted aloud.
4908. And the comrades of strong Polypoetes rose up and bare to the hollow ships the prize of the king.
4909. Then for the archers he set forth as a prize dark iron — ten double axes laid he down, and ten single; and he set up the mast of a dark - prowed ship far off in the sands, and with a slender cord made fast thereto by the foot a timorous dove, and bade shoot thereat.
4910. Whoso shall hit the timorous dove let him take up all the double axes and bear them home, and whoso shall hit the cord, albeit he miss the bird: lo, his is the worser shot; he shall bear as his prize the single axes.
4911. So spake he, and there arose the might of the prince Teucer, and Meriones the valiant squire of Idomeneus.
4912. Then took they the lots and shook them in a helmet of bronze, and Teucer drew by lot the first place.
4913. Forthwith he let fly an arrow with might, howbeit he vowed not that he would sacrifice to the king a glorious hecatomb of firstling lambs.
4914. So he missed the bird, for Apollo grudged him that, but hit the cord beside its foot wherewith the bird was tied, and clean away the bitter arrow cut the cord.
4915. Then the dove darted skyward, and the cord hung loose toward earth; and the Achaeans shouted aloud.
4916. But Meriones speedily snatched the bow from Teucer's hand — an arrow had he long been holding while Teucer aimed — and vowed forthwith that he would sacrifice to Apollo that smiteth afar a glorious hecatomb of firstling lambs.
4917. High up beneath the cloud he spied the timorous dove; there as she circled round he struck her in the midst beneath the wing, and clean through passed the shaft, and fell again and fixed itself in the ground before the foot of Meriones; but the dove, lighting on the mast of the dark - prowed ship, hung down her head, and her thick plumage drooped.
4918. Swiftly the life fled from her limbs, and she fell far from the mast; and the people gazed thereon and were seized with wonder.
4919. And Meriones took up all ten double axes, and Teucer bare the single to the hollow ships.
4920. Then the son of Peleus brought and set in the place of gathering a far-shadowing spear and a cauldron, that the fire had not yet touched, of an ox's worth, embossed with flowers; and men that were hurlers of javelins arose.
4921. Up rose the son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon and Meriones, the valiant squire of Idomeneus.
4922. But among them spake swift - footed, goodly Achilles: Son of Atreus, we know how far thou excellest all, and how far thou art the best in might and in the casting of the spear; nay, take thou this prize and go thy way to the hollow ships; but the spear let us give to the warrior Meriones, if thy heart consenteth thereto: so at least would I have it:
4923. So spake he, and the king of men, Agamemnon, failed not to hearken.
4924. Then to Meriones he gave the spear of bronze, but the warrior handed to the herald Talthybius the beauteous prize.
4925. Then was the gathering broken up, and the folk scattered, each man to go to his own ship.
4926. The rest bethought them of supper and of sweet sleep, to take their fill thereof; but Achilles wept, ever remembering his dear comrade, neither might sleep, that mastereth all, lay hold of him, but he turned him ever to this side or to that, yearning for the man-hood and valorous might of Patroclus, thinking on all he had wrought with him and all the woes he had borne, passing though wars of men and the grievous waves.
4927. Thinking thereon he would shed big tears, lying now upon his side, now upon his back, and now upon his face; and then again he would rise upon his feet and roam distraught along the shore of the sea.
4928. Neither would he fail to mark the Dawn, as she shone over the sea and the sea-beaches, but would yoke beneath the car his swift horses, and bind Hector behind the chariot to drag him withal; and when he had haled him thrice about the barrow of the dead son of Menoetius, he would rest again in his hut, but would leave Hector outstretched on his face in the dust.
4929. Howbeit Apollo kept all defacement from his flesh, pitying the warrior even in death, and with the golden aegis he covered him wholly, that Achilles might not tear his body as he dragged him.
4930. Thus Achilles in his fury did foul despite unto goodly Hector; but the blessed gods had pity on him as they beheld him, and bestirred the keen-sighted Argeiphontes to steal away the corpse.
4931. And the thing was pleasing unto all the rest, yet not unto Hera or Poseidon or the flashing - eyed maiden, but they continued even as when at the first sacred Ilios became hateful in their eyes and Priam and his folk, by reason of the sin of Alexander, for that he put reproach upon those goddesses when they came to his steading, and gave precedence to her who furthered his fatal lustfulness.
4932. But when at length the twelfth morn thereafter was come, then among the immortals spake Phoebus Apollo: Cruel are ye, O ye gods, and workers of bane.
4933. Hath Hector then never burned for you thighs of bulls and goats without blemish?
4934. Him now have ye not the heart to save, a corpse though he be, for his wife to look upon and his mother and his child, and his father Priam and his people, who would forthwith burn him in the fire and pay him funeral rites.
4935. Nay, it is the ruthless Achilles, O ye gods, that ye are fain to succour, him whose mind is nowise right, neither the purpose in his breast one that may be bent; but his heart is set on cruelty, even as a lion that at the bidding of his great might and lordly spirit goeth forth against the flocks of men to win him a feast; even so hath Achilles lost all pity, neither is shame in his heart, the which harmeth men greatly and profiteth them withal.
4936. Lo, it may be that a man hath lost one dearer even than was this — a brother, that the selfsame mother bare, or haply a son; yet verily when he hath wept and wailed for him he maketh an end; for an enduring soul have the Fates given unto men.
4937. But this man, when he hath reft goodly Hector of life, bindeth him behind his chariot and draggeth him about the barrow of his dear comrade; in sooth neither honour nor profit shall he have therefrom.
4938. Let him beware lest we wax wroth with him, good man though he be; for lo, in his fury he doth foul despite unto senseless clay.
4939. Then stirred to anger spake to him white - armed Hera:
4940. Even this might be as thou sayest, Lord of the silver bow, if indeed ye gods will vouchsafe like honour to Achilles and to Hector.
4941. Hector is but mortal and was suckled at a woman's breast, but Achilles is the child of a goddess that I mine own self fostered and reared, and gave to a warrior to be his wife, even to Peleus, who was heartily dear to the immortals.
4942. And all of you, O ye gods, came to her marriage, and among them thyself too didst sit at the feast, thy lyre in thy hand, O thou friend of evil-doers, faithless ever.
4943. Then Zeus, the cloud - gatherer, answered her, and said:
4944. Hera, be not thou utterly wroth against the gods; the honour of these twain shall not be as one; howbeit Hector too was dearest to the gods of all mortals that are in Ilios.
4945. So was he to me at least, for nowise failed he of acceptable gifts.
4946. For never was my altar in lack of the equal feast, the drink - offiering and the savour of burnt-offering, even the worship that is our due.
4947. Howbeit of the stealing away of bold Hector will we naught; it may not be but that Achilles would be ware thereof; for verily his mother cometh ever to his side alike by night and day.
4948. But I would that one of the gods would call Thetis to come unto me, that I may speak to her a word of wisdom, to the end that Achilles may accept gifts from Priam, and give Hector back.
4949. So spake he, and storm - footed Iris hasted to bear his message, and midway between Samos and rugged Imbros she leapt into the dark sea, and the waters sounded loud above her.
4950. Down sped she to the depths hike a plummet of lead, the which, set upon the horn of an ox of the field, goeth down bearing death to the ravenous fishes.
4951. And she found Thetis in the hollow cave, and round about her other goddesses of the sea sat in a throng, and she in their midst was wailing for the fate of her peerless son, who to her sorrow was to perish in deep- soiled Troy, far from his native land.
4952. And swift - footed Iris drew near, and spake to her: Rouse thee, 0 Thetis; Zeus, whose counsels are everlasting, calleth thee.
4953. Then spake in answer Thetis, the silver - footed goddess:
4954. Wherefore summoneth me that mighty god?
4955. I have shame to mingle in the company of the immortals, seeing I have measurehess griefs at heart.
4956. Howbeit I will go, neither shall his word be vain, whatsoever he shall speak.
4957. So saying, the fair goddess took a dark - hued veil, than which was no raiment more black, and set out to go, and before her wind - footed swift Iris led the way; and about them the surge of the sea parted asunder.
4958. And when they had stepped forth upon the beach they sped unto heaven; and they found the son of Cronos, whose voice is borne afar, and around him sat gathered together all the other blessed gods that are for ever.
4959. Then she sate her down beside father Zeus, and Athene gave place.
4960. And Hera set in her hand a fair golden cup, and spake words of cheer.; and Thetis drank, and gave back the cup.
4961. Then among them the father of men and gods was first to speak:
4962. Thou art come to Olympus, 0, goddess Thetis, for all thy sorrow, though thou hast comfortless grief at heart; I know it of myself; yet even so will I tell thee wherefore I called thee hither.
4963. For nine days' space hath strife arisen among the immortals as touching the corpse of Hector and Achilles, sacker of cities.
4964. They are for bestirring the keen-sighted Argeiphontes to steal the body away, yet herein do I accord honour unto Achilles; for I would fain keep in time to come thy worship and thy love.
4965. Haste thee with all speed to the host and declare unto thy son my bidding.
4966. Say unto him that the gods are angered with him, and that I above all immortals am filled with wrath, for that in the fury of his heart he holdeth Hector at the beaked ships and gave him not back, if so be he may be seized with fear of me and give Hector back.
4967. But I will send forth Iris unto great-hearted Priam, to bid him go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom his dear son, and to bear gifts unto Achilles which shall make glad his heart.
4968. So spake he, and the goddess, silver - footed Thetis, failed not to hearken, but went darting down from the peaks of Olympus, and came to the hut of her son.
4969. There she found him groaning ceaselessly, and round about him his dear comrades with busy haste were making ready their early meal, and in the hut a ram, great and shaggy, lay slaughtered for them.
4970. Then she, his queenly mother, sate her down close by his side and stroked him with her hand, and spake, and called him by name:
4971. My child, how long wilt thou devour thine heart with weeping and sorrowing, and wilt take no thought of food, neither of the couch?
4972. Good were it for thee even to have dalliance in a woman's embrace.
4973. For, I tell thee, thou shalt not thyself be long in life, but even now doth death stand hard by thee and mighty fate.
4974. But hearken thou forthwith unto me, for I am a messenger unto thee from Zeus.
4975. He declareth that that the gods are angered with thee, and that himself above all immortals is filled with wrath, for that in the fury of thine heart thou holdest Hector at the beaked ships, and gavest him not back.
4976. Nay come, give him up, and take ransom for the dead.
4977. Then in answer to her spake Achilles, swift of foot:
4978. So let it be; whoso bringeth ransom, let him bear away the dead, if verily with full purpose of heart the Olympian himself so biddeth.
4979. On this wise amid the gathering of the ships mother and son spake many winged words one to the other, but the son of Cronos sent forth Iris to sacred Ilios:
4980. Up, go, swift Iris; leave thou the abode of Olympus and bear tidings within Ilios unto great-hearted Priam that he go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom his dear son, and that he bear gifts unto Achilles which shall make glad his heart; alone let him go, neither let any man beside of the Trojans go with him.
4981. A herald may attend him, an elder man, to guide the mules and the light - running waggon, and to carry back to the city the dead, even him that Achilles slew.
4982. Let not death be in his thoughts.
4983. neither any fear; such a guide will we give him, even Argeiphontes, who shall lead him, until in his leading he bring him nigh to Achilles.
4984. And when he shall have led him into the hut, neither shall Achilles himself slay him nor suffer any other to slay; for not without wisdom is he, neither without purpose, nor yet hardened in sin; nay, with all kindliness will he spare a suppliant man.
4985. So spake he, and storm - footed Iris hasted to bear his message.
4986. She came to the house of Priam, and found therein clamour and wailing.
4987. His sons sat about their father within the court sullying their garments with their tears, and in their midst was the old king close - wrapped in his mantle; and upon the old man's head and neck was filth in abundance, which he had gathered in his hands as he grovelled on the earth.
4988. And his daughters and his sons' wives were wailing throughout the house, bethinking them of the warriors many and valiant who were lying low, slain by the hands of the Argives.
4989. And the messenger of Zeus drew nigh to Priam, and spake to him; softly she uttered her voice, yet trembling gat hold of his himbs:
4990. Be of good courage, O Priam, son of Dardanus, and fear thou not at all.
4991. Not to forbode any evil to thee am I come hither, but with good intent.
4992. I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who far away though he be, hath exceeding care for thee and pity.
4993. The Olympian biddeth thee ransom goodly Hector, and bear gifts to Achilles which shall make glad his heart; alone do thou go, neither let any man beside of the Trojans go with thee.
4994. A herald may attend thee, an elder man, to guide the mules and the light - running waggon, and to carry back to the city the dead, even him that Achilles slew.
4995. Let not death be in thy thoughts, neither any fear; such a guide shall go with thee, even Argeiphontes, who shall lead thee, until in his heading he bring thee nigh to Achilles.
4996. And when he shall have led thee into the hut, neither shall Achilles himself slay thee nor suffer any other to slay; for not without wisdom is he, neither without purpose, nor yet hardened in sin; nay, with all kindliness will he spare a suppliant man.
4997. When she had thus spoken swift - footed Iris departed; but the king bade his sons make ready the running mule waggon, and bind the wicker box thereon.
4998. And himself he went down to the vaulted treasure - chamber, fragrant of cedar wood and high of roof, that held jewels full many: and he called to him Hecabe his wife, and spake: Lady, from Zeus hath an Olympian messenger come to me, that I go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom my dear son, and that I bear gifts to Achilles which shall make glad his heart.
4999. But come, tell me this, how seemeth it to thy mind?
5000. For as touching mine own self, wondrously doth the desire of my heart bid me go thither to the ships, into the wide camp of the Achaeans.
5001. So spake he, but his wife uttered a shrill cry, and spake in answer:
5002. Ah, woe is me, whither now is gone the wisdom for the which of old thou wast famed among stranger folk and among them thou rulest?
5003. How art thou fain to go alone to the ships of the Achaeans to meet the eyes of the man who hath slain thy sons, many and valiant?
5004. Of iron verily is thy heart.
5005. For if so be he get thee in his power and his eyes behold thee, so savage and faithless is the man, he will neither pity thee nor anywise have reverence.
5006. Nay, let us now make our lament afar from him we mourn, abiding here in the hall.
5007. On this wise for him did mighty Fate spin with her thread at his birth, when myself did bear him, that he should glut swift - footed dogs far from his parents, in the abode of a violent man, in whose inmost heart I were fain to fix my teeth and feed thereon; then haply might deeds of requital be wrought for my son, seeing in no wise while playing the dastard was he slain of him, but while standing forth in defence of the men and deep- bosomed women of Troy, with no thought of shelter or of flight.
5008. Then in answer spake unto her the old man, god - like Priam:
5009. Seek not to stay me that am fain to go, neither be thyself a bird of ill-boding in my halls; thou shalt not persuade me.
5010. For if any other of the men that are upon the face of the earth had bidden me this, whether of seers that divine from sacrifice or of priests, a false thing might we deem it, and turn away therefrom the more; but now — for myself I heard the voice of the goddess and looked upon her face —
5011. I will go forth, neither shall her word be vain.
5012. And if it be my fate to lie dead by the ships of the brazen - coated Achaeans, so would I have it; forthwith let Achilles slay me, when once I have clasped in my arms my son, and have put from me the desire for wailing.
5013. He spake, and opened the goodly lids of chests, wherefrom he took twelve beauteous robes and twelve cloaks of single fold, and as many coverlets, and as many white mantles, and therewithal as many tunics.
5014. And of gold he weighed out and bare forth talents, ten in all, and two gleaming tripods, and four cauldrons, and a cup exceeding fair, that the men of Thrace had given him when he went thither on an embassage, a great treasure; not even this did the old man spare in his halls, for he was exceeding fain to ransom his dear son.
5015. Then drave he all the Trojans from out the portico, and chid them with words of reviling:
5016. Get ye hence, wretches, ye that work me shame !
5017. Have ye not also lamentation at home, that ye come hither to vex me?
5018. Count ye it not enough that Zeus, son of Cronos, hath brought this sorrow upon me, that I should lose my son the best of all?
5019. Nay, but yourselves too shall know it, for easier shall ye be, now he is dead, for the Achaeans to slay.
5020. But for me, or ever mine eyes behold the city sacked and laid waste, may I go down into the house of Hades.
5021. He spake, and plying his staff went among the men, and they went forth from before the old man in his haste.
5022. Then called he aloud to his sons, chiding Helenus and Paris and goodly Agathon and Pammon and Antiphonus and Polites, good at the war-cry, and Deiphobus and Hippothous and lordly Dius.
5023. To these nine the old man called aloud, and gave command:
5024. Haste ye, base children that are my shame; would that ye all together in Hector's stead had been slain at the swift ships !
5025. Woe is me, that am all unblest, seeing that I begat sons the best in the broad land of Troy, yet of them I avow that not one is left, not godlike Nestor, not Troilus the warrior charioteer, not Hector that was a god among men, neither seemed he as the son of a mortal man, but of a god: all them hath Ares slain, yet these things of shame are all left me, false of tongue, nimble of foot, peerless at beating the floor in the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own folk.
5026. Will ye not make me ready a waggon, and that with speed, and lay all these things therein, that we may get forward on our way?
5027. So spake he, and they, seized with fear of the rebuke of their father, brought forth the light - running waggon drawn of mules, fair and newly - wrought, and bound upon it the wicker box; and down from its peg they took the mule - yoke, a box - wood yoke with a knob thereon, well - fitted with guiding - rings; and they brought forth the yoke - band of nine cubits, and therewithal the yoke.
5028. The yoke they set with care upon the polished pole at the upturned end thereof, and cast the ring upon the thole; and they bound it fast to the knob with three turns to left and right, and thereafter made it fast to the post, and bent the hook thereunder.
5029. Then they brought forth from the treasure - chamber and heaped upon the polished waggon the countless ransom for Hector's head, and yoked the strong - hooved mules that toil in harness, which on a time the Mysians had given to Priam, a splendid gift.
5030. And for Priam they led beneath the yoke horses that the old king kept for his own and reared at the polished stall.
5031. Thus were the twain letting yoke their cars, in the high palace, even the herald and Priam, with thoughts of wisdom in their hearts, when nigh to them came Hecabe, her heart sore stricken, bearing in her right hand honey - hearted wine in a cup of gold, that they might make libation ere they went.
5032. And she stood before the horses, and spake, saying:
5033. Take now, pour libation to father Zeus, and pray that thou mayest come back home from the midst of the foemen, seeing thy heart sendeth thee forth to the ships, albeit I am fain thou shouldst not go, Thereafter make thou prayer unto the son of Cronos, lord of the dark chouds, the god of Ida, that looketh down upon all the land of Troy, and ask of him a bird of omen, even the swift messenger that to himself is dearest of birds and is mightiest in strength; let him appear upon thy right hand, to the end that marking the sign with thine own eyes, thou mayest have trust therein, and go thy way to the ships of the Danaans of fleet steeds.
5034. But if so be Zeus whose voice is borne afar grant thee not his own messenger, then I of a surety should not urge thee on and bid thee go to the ships of the Argives, how eager soever thou be.
5035. Then in answer spake unto her godlike Priam:
5036. Wife, I will not disregard this hest of thine; for good is it to lift up hands to Zeus, if so be he will have pity.
5037. Thus spake the old man, and bade the housewife that attended pour over his hands water undefiled; and the handmaid drew nigh bearing in her hands alike basin and ewer.
5038. Then, when he had washed his hands, he took the cup from his wife and then made prayer, standing in the midst of thie court, and poured forth the wine, with a look toward heaven, and spake ahoud, saying: Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, grant that I may come unto Achilles' hut as one to be welcomed and to be pitied; and send a bird of omen, even the swift messenger that to thyself is dearest of birds and is mightiest in strength; let him appear upon my right hand, to the end that, marking the sign with mine own eyes, I may have trust therein, and go my way to the ships of the Danaans of fleet steeds.
5039. So spake he in prayer, and Zeus the Counsellor heard him.
5040. Forthwith he sent an eagle, surest of omen among winged birds, the dusky eagle, even the hunter, that men call also the black eagle.
5041. Wide as is the door of some rich man's high - roofed treasure - chamber, a door well fitted with bolts, even so wide spread his wings to this side and to that; and he appeared to them on the right, darting across the city.
5042. And at sight of him they waxed glad, and the hearts in the breasts of all were cheered.
5043. Then the old man made haste and stepped upon his car, and drave forth from the gateway and the echoing portico.
5044. In front the mules drew the four- wheeled waggon, driven of wise - hearted Idaeus, and behind came the horses that the old man ever plying the lash drave swiftly through the city; and his kinsfolk all followed wailing aloud as for one faring to his death.
5045. But when they had gone down from the city and were come to the plain, back then to Ilios turned his sons and his daughters' husbands; howbeit the twain were not unseen of Zeus, whose voice is borne afar, as they came forth upon the plain, but as he saw the old man he had pity, and forthwith spake to Hermes, his dear son: Hermes, seeing thou lovest above all others to companion a man, and thou givest ear to whomsoever thou art minded up, go and guide Priam unto the hollow ships of the Achaeans in such wise that no man may see him or be ware of him among all the Damans, until he be come to the son of Peleus.
5046. So spake he, and the messenger, Argeiphontes, failed not to hearken.
5047. Straightway he bound beneath his feet his beautiful sandals, immortal, golden, which were wont to bear him over the waters of the sea and over the boundless land swift as the blasts of the wind.
5048. And he took the wand wherewith he lulls to sleep the eyes of whom he will, while others again he awakens even out of slumber.
5049. With this in his hand the strong Argeiphontes flew, and quickly came to Troy-land and the Hellespont.
5050. Then went he his way in the likeness of a young man that is a prince, with the first down upon his lip, in whom the charm of youth is fairest.
5051. Now when the others had driven past the great barrow of Ilus, they halted the mules and the horses in the river to drink; for darkness was by now come down over the earth.
5052. Then the herald looked and was ware of Hermes hard at hand, and he spake to Priam, saying:
5053. Bethink thee, son of Dardanus, here is somewhat that calls for prudent thought.
5054. I see a man, and anon methinks shall we be cut to pieces.
5055. Come, let us flee in thie chariot, or at least clasp his knees and entreat him, if so be he will have pity.
5056. So spake he, and the old man's mind was confounded and he was sore afraid, and up stood the hair on his pliant limbs, and he stood in a daze.
5057. But of himself the Helper drew nigh, and took the ohd man's hand, and made question of him, saying:
5058. Whither, Father, dost thou thus guide horses and mules through the immortal night when other mortals are sleeping?
5059. Art thou untouched by fear of the fury - breathing Achaeans, hostile men and ruthless that are hard anigh thee?
5060. If one of them should espy thee bearing such store of treasure through the swift bhack night, what were thy counsel then?
5061. Thou art not young thyself, and thy companion here is old, that ye should defend you against a man, when one waxes wroth without a cause.
5062. But as for me, I will nowise harm thee, nay, I will even defend thee against another; for like unto my dear father art thou in mine eyes.
5063. Then the old man, godlike Priam, answered him:
5064. Even so, dear son, are all these things as thou dost say.
5065. Howbeit still hath some god stretched out his hand even over me, seeing he hath sent a way - farer such as thou to meet me, a bringer of blessing, so wondrous in form and comeliness, and withal thou art wise of heart; blessed parents are they from whom thou art sprung.
5066. Then again the messenger, Argeiphontes, spake to him: Yea verily, old sire, all this hast thou spoken according to right.
5067. But come, tell me this, and declare it truly, whether thou art bearing forth these many treasures and goodly unto some foreign folk, where they may abide for thee in safety, or whether by now ye are all forsaking holy Ilios in fear; so great a warrior, the noblest of all, hath perished, even thy son; for never held he back from warring with the Achaeans.
5068. And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him:
5069. Who art thou, noble youth, and from what parents art thou sprung, seeing thou speakest thus fitly of the fate of my hapless son?
5070. Then again the messenger, Argeiphontes, spake to him:
5071. Thou wouldest make trial of me, old sire, in asking me of goodly Hector.
5072. Him have mine eyes full often seen in battle, where men win glory, and when after driving the Argives to the ships he would slay them in havoc with the sharp bronze; and we stood there and marvelled, for Achilles would not suffer us to fight, being filled with wrath against the son of Atreus.
5073. His squire am I, and the selfsame well - wrought ship brought us hither.
5074. Of the Myrmidons am I one, and my father is Polyctor.
5075. Rich in substance is he, and an old man even as thou, and six sons hath he, and myself the seventh.
5076. From these by the casting of lots was I chosen to fare hitherward.
5077. And now am I come to the plain from the ships; for at dawn the bright - eyed Achaeans will set the battle in array about the city.
5078. For it irketh them that they sit idle here, nor can the kings of the Achaeans avail to hold them back in their eagerness for war.
5079. And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him:
5080. If thou art indeed a squire of Peleus' son Achilles, come now, tell me all the truth, whether my son is even yet by the ships or whether by now Achilles hath hewn him limb from limb and cast him before his dogs.
5081. Then again the messenger Argeiphontes spake to him:
5082. Old sire, not yet have dogs and birds devoured him, but still he lieth there beside the ship of Achilles amid the huts as he was at the first; and this is now the twelfth day that he lieth there, yet his flesh decayeth not at all, neither do worms consume it, such as devour men that be slain in fight.
5083. Truly Achilles draggeth him ruthlessly about the barrow of his dear comrade, so oft as sacred Dawn appeareth, howbeit he marreth him not; thou wouldst thyself marvel, wert thou to come and see how dewy - fresh he lieth, and is washen clean of blood, neither hath anywhere pollution; and all the wounds are closed wherewith he was stricken, for many there were that drave the bronze into his flesh.
5084. In such wise do the blessed gods care for thy son, a corpse though he be, seeing he was dear unto their hearts.
5085. So spake he, and the old man waxed glad, and answered, saying:
5086. My child, a good thing is it in sooth e'en to give to the immortals such gifts as be due; for never did my son — as sure as ever such a one there was — forget in our halls the gods that hold Olympus; wherefore they have remembered this for him, even though he be in the doom of death.
5087. But come, take thou from me this fair goblet, and guard me myself, and guide me with the speeding of the gods, until I be come unto the hut of the son of Peleus.
5088. And again the messenger, Argeiphontes, spake to him:
5089. Thou dost make trial of me, old sire, that am younger than thou; but thou shalt not prevail upon me, seeing thou biddest me take gifts from thee while Achilles knoweth naught thereof.
5090. Of him have I fear and awe at heart, that I should defraud him, lest haply some evil befall me hereafter.
5091. Howbeit as thy guide would I go even unto glorious Argos, attending thee with kindly care in a swift ship or on foot; nor would any man make light of thy guide and set upon thee.
5092. So spake the Helper, and leaping upon the chariot behind the horses quickly grasped in his hands the lash and reins, and breathed great might into the horses and mules.
5093. But when they were come to the walls and the trench that guarded the ships, even as the watchers were but now busying them about their supper, upon all of these the messenger Argeiphontes shed sleep, and forthwith opened the gates, and thrust back the bars, and brought within Priam, and the splendid gifts upon the wain.
5094. But when they were come to the hut of Peleus' son, the lofty hut which the Myrmidons had builded for their king, hewing therefor beams of fir — and they had roofed it over with downy thatch, gathered from the meadows; and round it they reared for him, their king, a great court with thick - set pales; and the door thereof was held by one single bar of fir that three Achaeans were wont to drive home, and three to draw back the great bolt of the door (three of the rest, but Achilles would drive it home even of himself) — then verily the helper Hermes opened the door for the old man, and brought in the glorious gifts for the swift - footed son of Peleus; and from the chariot he stepped down to the ground and spake, saying:
5095. Old sire, I that am come to thee am immortal god, even Hermes; for the Father sent me to guide thee on thy way.
5096. But now verily will I go back, neither come within Achilles' sight; good cause for wrath would it be that an immortal god should thus openly be entertained of mortals.
5097. But go thou in, and clasp the knees of the son of Peleus and entreat him by his father and his fair - haired mother and his child, that thou mayest stir his soul.
5098. So spake Hermes, and departed unto high Olympus; and Priam leapt from his chariot to the ground, and left there Idaeus, who abode holding the horses and mules; but the old man went straight toward the house where Achilles, dear to Zeus, was wont to sit.
5099. Therein he found Achilles, but his comrades sat apart: two only, the warrior Automedon and Alcimus, scion of Ares, waited busily upon him; and he was newly ceased from meat, even from eating and drinking, and the table yet stood by his side.
5100. Unseen of these great Priam entered in, and coming close to Achilles, clasped in his hands his knees, and kissed his hands, the terrible, man-slaying hands that had slain his many sons.
5101. And as when sore blindness of heart cometh upon a man, that in his own country slayeth another and escapeth to a land of strangers, to the house of some man of substance, and wonder holdeth them that look upon him; even so was Achilles seized with wonder at sight of godlike Priam, and seized with wonder were the others likewise, and they glanced one at the other.
5102. But Priam made entreaty, and spake to him, saying:
5103. Remember thy father, O Achilles like to the gods, whose years are even as mine, on the grievous threshold of old age.
5104. Him full likely the dwellers that be round about are entreating evilly, neither is there any to ward from him ruin and bane.
5105. Howbeit, while he heareth of thee as yet alive he hath joy at heart, and therewithal hopeth day by day that he shall see his dear son returning from Troy-land.
5106. But I —
5107. I am utterly unblest, seeing I begat sons the best in the broad land of Troy, yet of them I avow that not one is left.
5108. Fifty I had, when the sons of the Achaeans came; nineteen were born to me of the self - same womb, and the others women of the palace bare.
5109. Of these, many as they were, furious Ares hath loosed the knees, and he that alone was left me, that by himself guarded the city and the men, him thou slewest but now as he fought for his country, even Hector.
5110. For his sake am I now come to the ships of the Achaeans to win him back from thee, and I bear with me ransom past counting.
5111. Nay, have thou awe of the gods, Achilles, and take pity on me, remembering thine own father.
5112. Lo, I am more piteous far than he, and have endured what no other mortal on the face of earth hath yet endured, to reach forth my hand to the face of him that hath slain my sons.
5113. So spake he, and in Achilles he roused desire to weep for his father; and he took the old man by the hand, and gently put him from him.
5114. So the twain bethought them of their dead, and wept; the one for man-slaying Hector wept sore, the while he grovelled at Achilles' feet, but Achilles wept for his own father, and now again for Patroclus; and the sound of their moaning went up through the house.
5115. But when goodly Achilles had had his fill of lamenting, and the longing therefor had departed from his heart and limbs, forthwith then he sprang from his seat, and raised the old man by his hand, pitying his hoary head and hoary beard; and he spake and addressed him with winged words:
5116. Ah, unhappy man, full many in good sooth are the evils thou hast endured in thy soul.
5117. How hadst thou the heart to come alone to the ships of the Achaeans, to meet the eyes of me that have slain thy sons many and valiant?
5118. Of iron verily is thy heart.
5119. But come, sit thou upon a seat, and our sorrows will we suffer to lie quiet in our hearts, despite our pain; for no profit cometh of chill lament.
5120. For on this wise have the gods spun the thread for wretched mortals, that they should live in pain; and themselves are sorrowless.
5121. For two urns are set upon the floor of Zeus of gifts that he giveth, the one of ills, the other of blessings.
5122. To whomsoever Zeus, that hurleth the thunderbolt, giveth a mingled lot, that man meeteth now with evil, now with good; but to whomsoever he giveth but of the baneful, him he maketh to be reviled of man, and direful madness driveth him over the face of the sacred earth, and he wandereth honoured neither of gods nor mortals.
5123. Even so unto Peleus did the gods give glorious gifts from his birth; for he excelled all men in good estate and in wealth, and was king over the Myrmidons, and to him that was but a mortal the gods gave a goddess to be his wife.
5124. Howbeit even upon him the gods brought evil, in that there nowise sprang up in his halls offspring of princely sons, but he begat one only son, doomed to an untimely fate.
5125. Neither may I tend him as he groweth old, seeing that far, far from mine own country I abide in the land of Troy, vexing thee and thy children.
5126. And of thee, old sire, we hear that of old thou wast blest; how of all that toward the sea Lesbos, the seat of Macar, encloseth, and Phrygia in the upland, and the boundless Hellespont, over all these folk, men say, thou, old sire, wast preeminent by reason of thy wealth and thy sons.
5127. Howbeit from the time when the heavenly gods brought upon thee this bane, ever around thy city are battles and slayings of men.
5128. Bear thou up, neither wail ever ceaselessly in thy heart; for naught wilt thou avail by grieving for thy son, neither wilt thou bring him back to life; ere that shalt thou suffer some other ill.
5129. And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him:
5130. Seat me not anywise upon a chair, O thou fostered of Zeus, so long as Hector lieth uncared - for amid the huts; nay, give him back with speed, that mine eyes may behold him; and do thou accept the ransom, the great ransom, that we bring.
5131. So mayest thou have joy thereof, and come to thy native land, seeing that from the first thou hast spared me.
5132. Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake to him Achilles swift of foot:
5133. Provoke me no more, old sir; I am minded even of myself to give Hector back to thee; for from Zeus there came to me a messenger, even the mother that bare me, daughter of the old man of the sea.
5134. And of thee, Priam, do I know in my heart — it nowise escapeth me — that some god led thee to the swift ships of the Achaeans.
5135. For no mortal man, were he never so young and strong, would dare to come amid the host; neither could he then escape the watch, nor easily thrust back the bar of our doors.
5136. Wherefore now stir my heart no more amid my sorrows, lest, old sire, I spare not even thee within the huts, my suppliant though thou art, and so sin against the behest of Zeus.
5137. So spake he, and the old man was seized with fear, and hearkened to his word.
5138. But like a lion the son of Peleus sprang forth from the houses — not alone, for with him went two squires as well, even the warrior Automedon and Alcimus, they that Achilles honoured above all his comrades, after the dead Patroclus.
5139. These then loosed from beneath the yoke the horses and mules, and led within the herald, the crier of the old king, and set him on a chair; and from the wain of goodly felloes they took the countless ransom for Hector's head.
5140. But they left there two robes and a fair - woven tunic, to the end that Achilles might enwrap the dead therein and so give him to be borne to his home.
5141. Then Achilles called forth the hand - maids and bade them wash and anoint him, bearing him to a place apart that Priam might not have sight of his son, lest in grief of heart he should not restrain his wrath, whenso he had sight of his son, and Achilles' own spirit be stirred to anger, and he slay him, and so sin against the behest of Zeus.
5142. So when the handmaids had washed the body and anointed it with oil, and had cast about it a fair cloak and a tunic, then Achilles himself lifted it and set it upon a bier, and his comrades with him lifted it upon the polished waggon.
5143. Then he uttered a groan, and called by name upon his dear comrade:
5144. Be not thou wroth with me, Patroclus, if thou hearest even in the house of Hades that I have given back goodly Hector to his dear father, seeing that not unseemly is the ransom he hath given me.
5145. And unto thee shall I render even of this all that is thy due.
5146. So spake goodly Achilles, and went back within the hut and on the richly - wrought chair wherefrom he had risen sate him down by the opposite wall, and he spake unto Priam, saying:
5147. Thy son, old sire, is given back according to thy wish, and lieth upon a bier; and at break of day thou shalt thyself behold him, as thou bearest him hence; but for this present let us bethink us of supper.
5148. For even the fair - haired Niobe bethought her of meat, albeit twelve children perished in her halls, six daughters and six lusty sons.
5149. The sons Apollo slew with shafts from his silver bow, being wroth against Niobe, and the daughters the archer Artemis, for that Niobe had matched her with fair - cheeked Leto, saying that the goddess had borne but twain, while herself was mother to many; wherefore they, for all they were but twain, destroyed them all.
5150. For nine days' space they lay in their blood, nor was there any to bury them, for the son of Cronos turned the folk to stones; howbeit on the tenth day the gods of heaven buried them; and Niobe bethought her of meat, for she was wearied with the shedding of tears.
5151. And now somewhere amid the rocks, on the lonely mountains, on Sipylus, where, men say, are the couching - places of goddesses, even of the nymphs that range swiftly in the dance about Achelous, there, albeit a stone, she broodeth over her woes sent by the gods.
5152. But come, let us twain likewise, noble old sire, bethink us of meat; and thereafter shalt thou make lament over thy dear son, when thou hast borne him into Ilios; mourned shall he be of thee many tears.
5153. Therewith swift Achilles sprang up, and slew a white - fleeced sheep, and his comrades flayed it and made it ready well and duly, and sliced it cunningly and spitted the morsels, and roasted them carefully and drew all off the spits.
5154. And Automedon took bread and dealt it forth on the table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt the meat.
5155. So they put forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before them.
5156. But when they had put from them the desire of food and drink, then verily Priam, son of Dardanus, marvelled at Achilles, how tall he was and how comely; for he was like the gods to look upon.
5157. And a son of Dardanus, did Achilles marvel, beholding his goodly aspect and hearkening to his words.
5158. But when they had had their fill of gazing one upon the other, then the old man, godlike Priam, was first to speak, saying:
5159. Show me now my bed with speed, O thou nurtured of Zeus, that lulled at length by sweet sleep we may rest and take our joy; for never yet have mine eyes closed beneath mine eyelids since at thy hands my son lost his life, but ever do I wail and brood over my countless sorrows, grovelling in the filth in the closed spaces of the court.
5160. But now have I tasted of meat, and have let flaming wine pass down my throat; whereas till now had I tasted naught.
5161. He spake, and Achilles bade his comrades and the handmaids set bedsteads beneath the portico, and to lay on them fair purple blankets, and to spread thereover coverlets, and on these to put fleecy cloaks for clothing.
5162. So the maids went forth from the hall with torches in their hands, and straightway spread two beds in busy haste.
5163. Then mockingly spake unto Priam Achilles, swift of foot:
5164. Without do thou lay thee down, dear old sire, lest there come hither one of the counsellors of the Achaeans, that ever sit by my side and take counsel, as is meet.
5165. If one of these were to have sight of thee through the swift black night, forthwith might he haply tell it to Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, and so should there arise delay in the giving back of the body.
5166. But come, tell me this, and declare it truly: for how many days' space thou art minded to make funeral for goodly Hector, to the end that for so long I may myself abide, and may keep back the host.
5167. And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him: saying:
5168. If thou indeed art willing that I accomplish for goodly Hector his burial, then in doing on this wise, O Achilles, wilt thou do according to my wish.
5169. Thou knowest how we are pent within the city, and far is it to fetch wood from the mountain, and the Trojans are sore afraid.
5170. For nine days' space will we wail for him in our halls, and on the tenth will we make his funeral, and the folk shall feast, and on the eleventh will we heap a barrow over him, and on the twelfth will we do battle, if so be we must.
5171. Then spake to him in answer swift - footed, goodly Achilles:
5172. Thus shall this also be aged Priam, even as thou wouldest have it; for I will hold back the battle for such time as thou dost bid.
5173. When he had thus spoken he clasped the old man's right hand by the wrist, lest his heart should any wise wax fearful.
5174. So they laid them to sleep there in the fore - hall of the house, the herald and Priam, with hearts of wisdom in their breasts; but Achilles slept in the innermost part of the well - builded hut, and by his side lay fair - cheeked Briseis.
5175. Now all the other gods and men, lords of chariots, slumbered the whole night through, overcome of soft sleep; but not upon the helper Hermes might sleep lay hold, as he pondered in mind how he should guide king Priam forth from the ships unmarked of the strong keepers of the gate.
5176. He took his stand above his head and spake to him, saying:
5177. Old sire, no thought then hast thou of any evil, that thou still sleepest thus amid foemen, for that Achilles has spared thee.
5178. Now verily hast thou ransomed thy son, and a great price thou gavest.
5179. But for thine own life must the sons thou hast, they that be left behind, give ransom thrice so great, if so be Agamemnon, Atreus' son, have knowledge of thee, or the host of the Achaeans have knowledge.
5180. So spake he, and the old man was seized with fear, and made the herald to arise.
5181. And Hermes yoked for them the horses and mules, and himself lightly drave them through the camp, neither had any man knowledge thereof.
5182. But when they were now come to the ford of the fair - flowing river, even eddying Xanthus, that immortal Zeus begat, then Hermes departed to high Olympus, and Dawn, the saffron -robed, was spreading over the face of all the earth.
5183. So they with moaning and wailing drave the horses to the city, and the mules bare the dead.
5184. Neither was any other ware of them, whether man or fair - girdled woman; but in truth Cassandra, peer of golden Aphrodite, having gone up upon Pergamus, marked her dear father as he stood in the car, and the herald, the city's crier; and she had sight of that other lying on the bier in the waggon drawn of the mules.
5185. Thereat she uttered a shrill cry, and called throughout all the town:
5186. Come ye, men and women of Troy, and behold Hector, if ever while yet he lived ye had joy of his coming back from battle; since great joy was he to the city and to all the folk.
5187. So spake she, nor was any man left there within the city, neither any woman, for upon all had come grief that might not be borne; and hard by the gates they met Priam, as he bare home the dead.
5188. First Hector's dear wife and queenly mother flung themselves upon the light - running waggon, and clasping his head the while, wailed and tore their hair; and the folk thronged about and wept.
5189. And now the whole day long until set of sun had they made lament for Hector with shedding of tears there without the gates, had not the old man spoken amid the folk from out the car:
5190. Make me way for the mules to pass through; thereafter shall ye take your fill of wailing, when I have brought him to the house.
5191. So spake he, and they stood apart and made way for the waggon.
5192. But the others, when they had brought him to the glorious house, laid him on a corded bedstead, and by his side set singers, leaders of the dirge, who led the song of lamentation — they chanted the dirge, and thereat the women made lament.
5193. And amid these white - armed Andromache led the wailing, holding in her arms the while the head of man-slaying Hector: Husband, perished from out of life art thou, yet in thy youth, and leavest me a widow in thy halls; and thy son is still but a babe, the son born of thee and me in our haplessness; neither do I deem that he will come to manhood, for ere that shall this city be wasted utterly.
5194. For thou hast perished that didst watch thereover, thou that didst guard it, and keep safe its noble wives and little children.
5195. These, I ween, shall soon be riding upon the hollow ships, and I among them; and thou, my child, shalt follow with me to a place where thou shalt labour at unseemly tasks, toiling before the face of some ungentle master, or else some Achaean shall seize thee by the arm and hurl thee from the wall, a woeful death, being wroth for that Hector slew his brother haply, or his father, or his son, seeing that full many Achaeans at the hands of Hector have bitten the vast earth with their teeth; for nowise gentle was thy father in woeful war.
5196. Therefore the folk wail for him throughout the city, and grief unspeakable and sorrow hast thou brought upon thy parents, Hector; and for me beyond all others shall grievous woes be left.
5197. For at thy death thou didst neither stretch out thy hands to me from thy bed, nor speak to me any word of wisdom whereon I might have pondered night and day with shedding of tears.
5198. So spake she wailing, and thereat the women made lament.
5199. And among them Hecabe in turns led the vehement wailing:
5200. Hector, far dearest to my heart of all my children, lo, when thou livedst thou wast dear to the gods, and therefore have they had care of thee for all thou art in the doom of death.
5201. For of other sons of mine whomsoever he took would swift - footed Achilles sell beyond the unresting sea, unto Samos and Imbros and Lemnos, shrouded in smoke, but, when from thee he had taken away thy life with the long - edged bronze oft would he drag thee about the barrow of his comrade, Patroclus, whom thou didst slay; howbeit even so might he not raise him up.
5202. all dewy - fresh thou liest in my halls as wert thou g newly slain, like as one whom Apollo of the silver bow assaileth with his gentle shafts and slayeth.
5203. So spake she wailing, and roused unabating lament.
5204. And thereafter Helen was the third to lead the wailing: Hector, far dearest to my heart of all my husband's brethren !
5205. In sooth my husband is godlike Alexander, that brought me to Troy-land — would I died ere then !
5206. For this is now the twentieth year from the time when I went from thence and am gone from my native land, but never yet heard I evil or despiteful word from thee; nay, if so be any other spake reproachfully of me in the halls, a brother of thine or a sister, or brother's fair - robed wife, or thy mother — but thy father was ever gentle as he had been mine own — yet wouldst thou turn them with speech and restrain them by the gentleness of thy spirit and thy gentle words.
5207. Wherefore I wail alike for thee and for my hapless self with grief at heart; for no longer have I anyone beside in broad Troy that is gentle to me or kind; but all men shudder at me.
5208. So spake she wailing, and thereat the countless throng made moan.
5209. But the old man Priam spake among the folk, saying: Bring wood now, ye men of Troy, unto the city, neither have ye anywise fear at heart of a cunning ambush of the Argives; for verily Achilles laid upon me this word when he sent me forth from the black ships, that he would do us no hurt until the twelfth dawn be come.
5210. So spake he, and they yoked oxen and mules to waggons, and speedily thereafter gathered together before the city.
5211. For nine days' space they brought in measureless store of wood, but when the tenth Dawn arose, giving light unto mortals, then bare they forth bold Hector, shedding tears the while, and on the topmost pyre they laid the dead man, and cast fire thereon.
5212. But soon as early Dawn appeared, the rosy-fingered, then gathered the folk about the pyre of glorious Hector.
5213. And when they were assembled and met together, first they quenched with flaming wine all the pyre, so far as the fire's might had come upon it, and thereafter his brethren and his comrades gathered the white bones, mourning, and big tears flowed ever down their cheeks.
5214. The bones they took and placed in a golden urn, covering them over with soft purple robes, and quickly laid the urn in a hollow grave, and covered it over with great close - set stones.
5215. Then with speed heaped they the mound, and round about were watchers set on every side, lest the well - greaved Achaeans should set upon them before the time.
5216. And when they had piled the barrow they went back, and gathering together duly feasted a glorious feast in the palace of Priam, the king fostered of Zeus.
5217. On this wise held they funeral for horse - taming Hector.
