1. Sing, goddess, the godlike wrath of Achilles, son of Peleus, that sociopathic wrath that caused countless pains for the Achaeans.
2. It hurled to Hades many precious lives of warriors.
3. And it began to make their bodies into picked - over scraps for dogs and for birds, all of them; and the plan of Zeus began to be fulfilled, from the point where first, the two having both begun a competition with each other, both of them faced off, the son of Atreus, lord of men, and god-like Achilles.
4. Who then of the gods threw together the two of them to fight in competition with one another?
5. The son of Leto and of Zeus: for that one, filled with anger at the king, set in motion an evil sickness up through the camp.
6. And the soldiers began to be killed, because he showed disrespect to that man Chryses, the god-talker.
7. What man?
8. -- the son of Atreus.
9. This is why: that man, came to the swift ships of the Achaeans in order to free his daughter and bearing boundless ransom, holding the wreaths of the far-shooter Apollo in his hands high up on his golden staff.
10. And he began to plead with all the Achaeans, and especially the two sons of Atreus, the organizers of the soldiers: “Sons of Atreus and also all the well - greaved Achaeans, with my blessing may the gods, having homes on Olympus, grant to you to sack utterly the city of Priam, and to return homewards well; but for me free my beloved child, and accept this ransom, showing reverence for the son of Zeus, the far-shooter Apollo.
11. At that point indeed all the Achaeans shouted their approval, both to treat with decency the sacrifice - leader and to accept the shining ransom;
12. However, this was not sweet to Atreus’ son, Agamemnon, in his heart, Instead, he dismissed him cruelly.
13. He began to impose a harsh command: “May emphasizing with tone and body language the pronoun “I”)
14. I not come upon you, old man, near the hollow ships, either hanging around now or returning back later, lest at that time the staff and wreaths of the god may not protect you.
15. that woman (again, emphasizing with tone and body language the pronoun “I”)
16. I will not free, until (Agamemnon emphasizes the next two words as a taunt) old age comes upon her in our house in Argos, far from her fatherland, working the loom and serving my bed.
17. Instead go away !
18. Do not keep provoking me me thus so that you might make your way home more safely than if you remain.
19. So he spoke.
20. The old man became frightened.
21. And he began to obey the command.
22. He walked in silence to the shore of the loudly - roaring sea.
23. And then, going far away, that old man as god-talker began speaking to lord Apollo, he whom light - haired Leto bore: “Hear me, silver - bowed one, you who stands guard over Chrysa and sacred Cilla, and are lord of Tenedos by force, Smintheus, if at any time I roofed over a shrine pleasing to you, or if at any time I completely burned fat thigh - bones for you, of bulls and of goats, fulfill this wish for me: may the Danaans pay their respects to my tears with your arrows.
24. So he spoke praying.
25. Phoebus Apollo listened to that man.
26. Seething with anger in his heart, he came down from the top of Olympus, carrying his bow and his covered quiver on his shoulders.
27. The arrows rattled noisily on the shoulders of the god as he seethed with anger, once he himself began to move.
28. That one made his way like night.
29. Then he began to crouch far away from the ships.
30. He fired an arrow in their midst - Fearsome was the rattle from the silver bow.
31. First he began to go after the mules and the swift dogs, but then, letting fly a sharp arrow against the men themselves, he began to strike.
32. The pyres of the corpses, one after another, were kept burning without any break.
33. For nine days, to start with, the arrows of the god kept moving up through the camp, On the tenth day, however, Achilles summoned the soldiers to an assembly, The white - armed goddess Hera, as it happened, placed this within that man ’s mind.
34. This was the reason: she kept worrying about the Danaans, because she kept watching them as they died.
35. After those were assembled and so were gathered together, swift - footed Achilles, standing up, spoke among them: “Son of Atreus, now I believe that we, driven back, will return to our homes again - if death, we might flee at all.
36. If truly war and plague together will force the Achaeans into submission.
37. Instead, come, let us ask either some seer or sacrifice - leader, or even a dream- interpreter, for a dream is also from Zeus.
38. That man may say why Phoebus Apollo became so greatly filled with anger; whether he reproaches us on account of a vow or a sacrifice, or if he in any way, having met with the rich aroma of fully - grown sheep and goats, would be willing to avert destruction from us.
39. Having spoken thus, that man sat down: among them stood up Calchas, son of Thestor, best by far of all the bird - interpreters, who knew the things that are, and the things that will be, and the things that were before, and who had led the ships of the Achaeans into Troy through his own gift of foresight, which Phoebus Apollo gave to him.
40. That man, thinking benevolently for them, addressed the assembly, and spoke in their midst: “Achilles, beloved of Zeus, you order me to explain the wrath of Apollo, the lord far-shooter: therefore (Calchas emphasizes the “I” with his intonation and body language) I will speak.
41. And as for you, take this in and swear to me most decidedly that to help me with determination, with your words and with your hands.
42. For I truly expect to fill with anger a man, he who greatly holds power over all the Argives, and whom the Achaeans obey: for the king has more power, whenever he is angry at an inferior man.
43. Here ’s the reason: even if, in fact, he would choke down his anger on that one particular day, nevertheless just as certainly going forward he holds a grudge in his chest, until he can fulfill it, So, as for you, make yourself clear, if you will protect me.
44. Swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed that man: “Having taken heart fully, give voice to the god ’s message, whatever it is you know.
45. For by Apollo, beloved of Zeus, and for whom you, Calchas, speaking with authority, reveal divine messages to the Danaans, no one, with me living and able to see upon this earth, will bear upon you heavy hands near the hollow ships - not any of all the Danaans together, Then he took courage and he began to speak, the blameless prophet: “Indeed that one finds fault neither with a vow nor a sacrifice, but rather, because of the god-talker, the man to whom Agamemnon showed disrespect: he did not free his daughter, nor did he accept the ransom.
46. Because of this the far-shooter gave sufferings and he will continue to give still.
47. That one certainly will not first drive off shameful destruction for the Danaans, before you give back the bright - eyed girl to her beloved father without a price, without a ransom, and lead a holy sacrifice to Chrysa: then we, having appeased him, might cause a change of heart.
48. That man, having spoken thus, sat down:
49. Then among them stood up the warrior son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon, stricken with pain.
50. His black heart completely begin being filled with rage.
51. His two eyes became like blazing fire.
52. Glaring evilly first of all at Calchas, he spoke: “Seer of evil things, you have never yet once said a favorable thing to me: these evil things are always dear to you in your heart to prophesy, and as for the fortunate, you never yet spoke any word nor accomplished anything.
53. And now, speaking on behalf of the gods, you declare among the Danaans that, that the far-shooter produces sufferings for them because of this particular thing: because I, for my part, was not willing to accept the shining ransom of the girl Chryseis, since I very much wish to hold that particular woman at home.
54. And in fact I have come to prefer her over Clytemnestra, my lawful wife, since she is not inferior to her - not in form, nor in stature, nor in mind, nor in any respect in the things that she can produce.
55. Yet even so I am willing to give her back, if this really is better: I, for my part, wish the soldiers to be safe, rather than to be wiped out.
56. As for me, prepare a prize appropriate for my rank immediately, so that alone of the Argives I am not without a prize, since this is also not fitting.
57. After all, each and every one of you see this, do n’t you - that my prize goes elsewhere.
58. And then swift - footed godly Achilles proceeded to answer him: “Son of Atreus, the man with the most glory, and most attached to possessions of all, how exactly will the Achaeans, great -hearted give you a prize?
59. We do not know of great common stores lying around anywhere at all.
60. Rather, as we all know, the things which we sacked from the cities, these things have been handed out.
61. and on the other hand it would also not be fitting for the soldiers to gather together again these clawed - back things things.
62. Instead, you for your part now release this girl to the god.
63. On our part, the Achaeans will repay you three times, and even four times, over, if Zeus at some point may confer the gift to sack completely the well - walled city Troy.
64. And answering, the ruler Agamemnon addressed that man: “Do not in this way - although being skillful, godlike Achilles - cheat with your mind, since you will not slip past nor persuade me.
65. Do you really want - while you yourself are to hold onto your own prize - me, for my part, like this to sit still without having one?
66. Are you telling me to give back this particular woman?
67. Mind you, if the great-hearted Achaeans will give me a prize, having fashioned it exactly according to my heart, so that it will be worth just as much … (Agamemnon uses non-verbal communication -- perhaps a shrug of the shoulders -- to communicate that this would be acceptable)
68. But, if they should not make a gift, then I myself, going in person would take possession for myself either your prize or that of Ajax, or that of Odysseus.
69. Having taken position, I will lead it away.
70. That man will be angry and stay angry, whomever I would approach.
71. That said, certainly we will return to consider once again these things, Now, come.
72. Let us drag a black ship into the divine sea.
73. Let us gather within sufficient rowers.
74. A sacrifice let us place inside.
75. The beautiful - cheeked Chryseis herself we will embark.
76. And let some single counsel - bearing man be the leader, either Ajax or Idomeneus or godlike Odysseus, or you, Son of Peleus, most outrageous of all men, unti, having performed sacrifices, you will appease him, the free-worker.
77. Having given dark look swift - footed Achilles addressed that man, “How dare you !
78. You, all clothed in indecency, obsessed by profit, how would any of the Achaeans with determination listen to your words, either to go on a journey or with his own strength to fight with men?
79. That is to be expected: I certainly did not come on account of Trojan spearmen here in order to fight, since they are not at fault to me in any way: for they did not ever drive away my cattle, nor my horses, nor in warrior - nourishing, fertile Phthia did they ever harm the harvest, since there are many things between: many shady mountains and also the roaring sea.
80. Instead you, oh unbelievably indecent one, together we followed so that you might rejoice, seeking to gain respect for Menelaus and for you, dog - face, from the Trojans.
81. Of these things you do not consider at all.
82. Nor do you give a damn -
83. And now you make make threats that you yourself to seize for yourself my prize, for which I struggled at length, and which the sons of the Achaeans gave to me.
84. Certainly I never have a prize equal to yours, whenever the Achaeans sack and pillage a well - managed city of the Trojans.
85. Instead, you may be sure, the greater part of the miserable fighting my hands perform; nevertheless whenever the division of spoils is at hand, for you the prize is much greater, while a smaller yet precious prize I for my part go on my way carrying upon the ships, after I am exhausted from waging war.
86. But now I will go to Phthia, since it is surely much superior to go home with the curved ships.
87. With me being disrespected here, I do not plan, to ladle out riches and wealth for you.
88. And then the lord of men, Agamemnon, began to answer him: “By all means run away, if your heart is stirred in that direction.
89. I, for one, certainly, do not plead with you to stay on account of me: beside me, you can be sure, are others as well who will respect me - - and most of all, Zeus, the giver of counsel.
90. You are the most hateful to me of the kings fostered by Zeus: for competing with others is always dear to you, as are both wars and battles.
91. If you are very strong, at some point a god gave this to you.
92. Going home with both your own ships and with your own comrades, lord it over the Myrmidons.
93. And as for me, I do n’t give a damn about you, nor do I worry about you bearing a grudge.
94. But I will make the following threat to you: as Phoebus Apollo is taking away for himself from me Chryseis, that woman, you can be sure, I will send on her way with both my own ship and my own comrades.
95. For my part, however, I will lead beautiful - cheeked Briseis, that prize of yours, going myself to your resting - place, so that you will clearly see how greatly I am superior to you, and another man as well will fear to declare himself an equal to me, and to treat himself as a peer to my face.
96. So he spoke.
97. And pain materialized in the son of Peleus.
98. The heart in his hairy chest was torn in two directions: whether HE having drawn for himself the sharp sword from beside his thigh, would make the men stand back while he for his part would kill the son of Atreus, or he could stop his anger and restrain his heart.
99. As he was turning over these things through his thoughts and through his heart, he was beginning to pull for himself out of its sheath a great sword, but Athena came from heaven.
100. The reason for this was that the white - armed goddess Hera sent her forth, both caring about and concerned for the both men equally in her heart.
101. She stood behind him, and by his light hair she gripped the son of Peleus, making herself visible to him alone.
102. No one of the others could see.
103. Achilles was astonished, and turned himself around.
104. And right then and there he recognized Pallas Athena.
105. and her two eyes appeared terrifying.
106. Having addressed her, he began to give voice to winged words: “There you are !
107. Why, daughter of aegis-holding Zeus, have you come?
108. Is it so that you might see for yourself the outrageous behavior of Agamemnon, son of Atreus?
109. Whatever the answer I will tell you something.
110. And this as well I expect to be fulfilled: by his outrageous actions soon he will destroy his life.
111. Then to him the goddess spoke, owl - eyed Athena: “I, for my part, came in order to stop this rage of yours - - if you might obey - down from the heavens.
112. The white - armed goddess Hera sent me forth, both caring about and concerned for both equally in her heart.
113. Instead, come on.
114. Step away from this quarrel.
115. Do not keep drawing for yourself the sword in your hand.
116. Instead, by all means, with words as much as you please paint him a nasty picture of how he can be sure it will be:
117. Because I will tell you how this is is.
118. And as well this will in reality be fulfilled.
119. In the future, there will be present in your possession three times as many shining gifts because of the outrageous behavior that we see here.
120. As for you, hold yourself back.
121. Listen to to us.
122. And, replying, swift - footed Achilles said to her: “Of course, goddess, it is necessary to heed a statement from the two of you, even though really filled up with anger in one’ s heart.
123. For it is better this way.
124. Whoever obeys the gods, they really listen to that man.
125. He spoke.
126. And on the silver hilt he held his heavy hand, Back into the sheath he shoved the great sword, and he did not disobey the command of Athena.
127. But as for that goddess, she had already departed to Olympus, into the home of aegis-holding Zeus among the other divinities.
128. The son of Peleus yet again with harsh words spoke to the son of Atreus.
129. And he was not yet stepping away from his anger; “Swollen with wine, having the eyes of a dog but the heart of a deer, never to arm yourself for battle together with the army, nor ever to enter an ambush with the most outstanding of the Achaeans have you had the fortitude in your heart.
130. That seems to you to be death.
131. Surely it is much more preferable along the broad camp of the Achaeans to take away for yourself gifts from whoever may have speak against you.
132. You are a king who devours his people, because you lord over nobodies !
133. For truly, son of Atreus, you would now have acted abusively for the last time.
134. Instead I will explain to you, and besides I will swear a great oath.
135. Truly by this very staff, which never in truth will sprout leaves and branches, after it first left behind its stump in the mountains, For the bronze stripped it all around both the leaves and the bark.
136. Now, however, the sons of the Achaeans, acting as judges, carry it in their palms, they who defend the laws of the cosmos on behalf of Zeus.
137. This will be a great oath to you.
138. In the future certainly a desire for Achilles will come upon the sons of the Achaeans each and every one of them !
139. And then you, though stricken with pain, will not have the power to provide protection in the least, when many fall dying at the hands of Hector the man-slaughterer.
140. You will gouge open your own heart within, consumed with fury because you showed respect in no way to the best of the Achaeans.
141. So spoke the son of Peleus.
142. And he flung against the ground the staff, drilled with golden studs.
143. And he himself began to sit.
144. And the son of Atreus from the other side continued in wrath.
145. And among them Nestor, pleasing in speech lept up, the articulate assembly - speaker of the Pylians, and from that man ’s tongue speech began to flow, sweeter than honey.
146. Already for him already two generations of mortal men had passed away, who previously along with him were raised and born in most holy Pylos.
147. And now, he was lord among the third generation.
148. He, thinking constructively for them, addressed the assembly and spoke in their midst: “I ca n’t believe it !
149. For sure great sorrow has reached the Achaean land;
150. You can be sure Priam would rejoice, as would the children of Priam, while the other Trojans would filled with pleasure greatly in their hearts, if they should hear about all these things here, about the two of you fighting, you who are above the Danaans in planning, and above in fighting.
151. Stop it !
152. Listen to me !
153. - the two of you both are younger than I am:
154. For as for me, already at times, with men even better than you both, spent my time.
155. And not once would ] those men, you may be sure, dismiss me.
156. Let me tell you, never have I seen, nor would I see with my own eyes, such men, such as Peirithous and Dryas, the shepherd of the soldiers, and Caeneus and Exadius and also godlike Polyphemus, and the son of Aegeus’ son, Theseus, a man like the immortals.
157. those were brought up as the mightiest of the men on earth.
158. Let me make this point clear: they were the mightiest.
159. And they would fight against the mightiest- against mountain-dwelling centaurs.
160. And utterly they annihilated them.
161. First, I used to spend my time among those men, having come from Pylos, from far away, from a distant land.
162. Why did I come?
163. Because called for me.
164. And I would fight on my own with my own two hands - I did that !
165. And let me make this point clear as well, with those men (gesturing in the distance to emphasize the separation from the present) no one of those who are now mortals on this earth could put up a fight.
166. But you may be sure, they paid attention to my plans and they would listen to my recommendations.
167. And so now, listen to me - - and I mean you (plural, addressing Agamemnon and Achilles both) !
168. -- because to listen is better.
169. As for you (singular, addressing Agamemnon), high - ranking though you are - do not take away for yourself the girl from this man here.
170. Instead, leave it just as at first the sons of Achaeans gave the prize to him;
171. And as for you, do not, son of Peleus, choose to compete with a king, pitting your strength against his, since a staff - holding king, to whom Zeus gave renown never has received possession of a position of respect that is comparable.
172. If you are stronger, a goddess as mother bore you, nevertheless he still is superior since he is lord over more people.
173. Son of Atreus, as for you, stop your rage: look !
174. I, for my part, I beg you to let go of your anger towards Achilles, he who to all the Achaeans is a great defense in cruel war.
175. And, answering him, ruling Agamemnon spoke: “Sure enough, you said all these things rightly, old man.
176. But this man here wishes to be above all others.
177. Not only does he desire to be stronger than everyone, but also to be lord over everyone, and to give orders to everyone.
178. As far as these things are concerned, I do n’t expect anyone to listen.
179. If the gods, existing always, made him a spearman, for that reason do they allow him to publicly deliver insults?
180. But then, interrupting, godlike Achilles began to answer him: “Surely I would be called both a coward and a nobody, if I will yield to you in each action, whatever you might say.
181. To other men, for all I care, make these commands.
182. Because, to me, you can be sure, do n’t give any orders.
183. In fact I, for my part, do not expect to listen to you in the future.
184. And I will tell you another thing.
185. You for your part, deposit it into your heart: indeed I will not fight against you with my hands on account of the girl - not with you, not with any other man - - since you (pl), having given her, now take her away for yourselves from me.
186. But as for the other things, which are in my possession beside the swift black ship, of these things you may not carry away anything, having picked it up with me unwilling.
187. But come on - really, try for yourself, so that these men here as well may learn - your dark blood will pour out right then and there around my spear.
188. Thus the two of them, having fought with such opposing speeches, they stood up, and they dismissed the assembly beside the ships of the Achaeans.
189. The son of Peleus, on the one hand, went on his way towards the resting - places and the well - balanced ships with both the son of Menoetius and his comrades.
190. Meanwhile, the son of Atreus dragged forward a swift ship to the sea.
191. And therein he selected twenty rowers.
192. And a sacrifice for the god he embarked, and up into the ship he, leading, seated the beautiful - cheeked Chryseis.
193. And in went as leader the adaptable Odysseus.
194. Then they, or on their side, having embarked, began to sail over the watery routes, while the son of Atreus commanded the soldiers to purify themselves.
195. Those began purifying themselves.
196. And they flinging the impurities into the sea.
197. Then they began to perform potent sacrifices for Apollo, of bulls and of goats, along the shore of the barren sea: and the aroma reached the heavens, swirling about in the smoke.
198. In this way they began working on these things down throughout the camp.
199. But, Agamemnon was not stepping away from the competition which he first threatened against Achilles, Instead he spoke to both Talthybius and Eurybates, those two who were his heralds and ready attendants: “You two go to the resting - place of Peleus’ son, Achilles.
200. After seizing beautiful - cheeked Briseis by the hand, bring her.
201. If he should not give her, then I myself person would seize her for myself, having come with an more men.
202. And for him that will be more to be feared.
203. Having spoken thus, he sent them forth.
204. He imposed the cruel command.
205. the two, unwilling, both walked along the shore of the barren sea, The two of them arrived at both the resting - places and the ships of the Myrmidons.
206. 2274292 b
207. That man they found beside both his resting - place and his black ship, sitting.
208. Nor did Achilles rejoice at all having caught sight of those two.
209. On the one hand, the two men, terrified at, and feeling shame before, the king, stood there.
210. but
211. They did not begin to address him about anything nor did they ask any questions.
212. For his part that man understood the situation in his heart and spoke: “Welcome, heralds, messengers of Zeus and also of men, Come closer.
213. Do n’t worry, you are not to be responsible to me for anything: instead Agamemnon is, the one who sent you two forth on account of the girl Briseis.
214. Achilles turns to Patroclus) Come, Zeus-born Patroclus, bring out the girl and give her to these two to lead away.
215. And let these two themselves be witnesses both before the blessed gods and before mortal people, and before that unfeeling king, if some day again need of me should arise to defend against shameful destruction for those others.
216. For surely he is out of control, with a self - destructive heart, He does not at all understand how to plan for the future and the past together so that the Achaeans might in the future fight besides the ships, safe under his watch.
217. So he spoke, and Patroclus began to obey his beloved companion; he led the beautiful - cheeked Bryseis out of the resting - place, and he gave her to lead away.
218. The two of them went back along the ships of the Achaeans, and that person, the woman, unwilling, started on her way along with those people.
219. As for Achilles, having started to cry, he at once took a seat far away from his companions, sinking down upon the shore of the gray saltwater and gazing out upon the boundless sea.
220. And he at length as god-talker spoke to to his beloved mother, stretching out his hands: “Mother, since you did after all give birth to me, although being destined for a short life, a position commanding appropriate respect, at the very least, the Olympian ought to extend to me - Zeus thundering on high.
221. But now not even a little did he show respect to me.
222. That is clearly the case because, in truth, the son of Atreus, wide - ruling Agamemnon, has shown disrespect to me.
223. For, having snatched my prize, he holds it - - he himself having stolen it.
224. So he spoke, shedding tears.
225. That man his revered mother heard, sitting in the depths of the sea beside her father, an old man.
226. Swiftly she rose up from the gray sea like the mist, and before that man, with him shedding tears, she sat down With her hand she caressed him and she also spoke, and began speaking to him by name: “Son, why are you crying?
227. What sorrow reached your heart?
228. Speak out - - do not conceal it in your mind !
229. -- so that we both might know.
230. Groaning deeply, he answered her, the swift - footed Achilles: “You know - why then should I list all these things to you, who already know?
231. We made our way into Thebes, the sacred city of Eetion.
232. That city we sacked from one end to the other, and we also led everything here.
233. And while these things the sons of the Achaeans divided up well among themselves:
234. And they took out the beautiful - cheeked daughter of Chryses for the son of Atreus.
235. But then Chryses, the sacrifice - leader of the far-shooter Apollo, came to the swift ships of the bronze - wearing Achaeans in order to free his daughter, bearing boundless ransom, holding the wreaths of the far-shooter Apollo in his hands aloft on his golden staff.
236. And he began to plead with all the Achaeans, and especially with the two sons of Atreus, the organizers of the soldiers.
237. At that point indeed all the other Achaeans responded approvingly, both to treat with decency the sacrifice - leader and to accept the shining ransom.
238. However, this was not sweet to the son of Atreus, Agamemnon, in his heart.
239. Instead, he dismissed him cruelly.
240. He began to impose upon him a harsh command.
241. The old man, seething with anger, made his way back.
242. and to him, after he had begun his prayer, Apollo listened, because Chryses was very dear to him.
243. And he fired an evil arrow against the Argives.
244. Now those soldiers, one after another, kept dying.
245. And those arrows of the god kept flying in on every side up through the wide camp of the Achaeans.
246. To us the prophet, thinking benevolently, began to publicly deliver the prophecies of the far-shooter.
247. Immediately I was the one who first began to urge that we should appease the god.
248. But then anger took hold of the son of Atreus, Instantly after standing up he gave a threatening command, which has been brought to completion.
249. Here is what I mean: that woman, to begin with, the quick - eyed Achaeans with a swift ship send to Chryses, At the same time, they bring gifts for the lord.
250. But this other woman just now the heralds went on their way, leading her away from my resting - place - the daughter of Briseus, the woman whom the sons of the Achaeans gave to me.
251. But if you really have the power, protect your noble son.
252. Having gone to Olympus, plead with Zeus, if at any time in any way either by what you have said or in fact by what you have done you cheered the heart of Zeus.
253. For often in the great rooms of your father I have heard you boasting, when you stated that for black - clouded son of Cronos you alone among the immortals fought off shameful destruction, when the other Olympians wished to tie him up, both Hera and Poseidon and even Pallas Athena.
254. But you, goddess, having come, released that one from his chains, having immediately called the hundred - handed one into great Olympus, he whom the gods call Briareus, and all men Aegaeon.
255. For that one, in turn, is better than his father in terms of physical strength.
256. He then sat down beside the son of Cronos, basking in his aura of power.
257. And before him they cowered the blessed gods.
258. So they did not still tie him up.
259. Now, having reminded him of these things, sit at his side and take hold of his knees, if somehow he might be willing to bring aid upon the Trojans, and to squeeze together the Achaeans both down among their ships’ decks, and around the sea, as they are killed, so that all may enjoy the full benefit of their king; and the son of Atreus, widely - ruling Agamemnon, also may recognize his own self - destructive stupidity, in that he showed no respect to the best of the Achaeans.
260. And Thetis, pouring down tears, then began to answer him: “( sighing deeply)
261. My son, why did I take the time to raise you - I, after bearing you for awful things?
262. I wish you might be able, beside the ships, without tears and without suffering, to remain quietly !
263. since, even now, the fate assigned to you is brief as it is, is not very long at all.
264. But now, you are, simultaneously, both doomed to die soon and unhappy beyond all people
265. So it was for an evil destiny that I gave birth to you in the great rooms.
266. To present this statement for you to Zeus, who delights in thunderbolt, I, in person, will go to snow - covered Olympus in the hopes that he may be persuaded.
267. But as for you, now sitting beside the swift - sailing ships, continue in wrath against the Achaeans.
268. Put a stop to your actions away from war completely.
269. For Zeus yesterday went into Oceanus to the midst of the blameless Ethiopians, on account of a feast
270. All the gods began to follow along.
271. But on the twelfth day he will come back again to Olympus.
272. And at that time, then on your behalf I will go to the bronze - floored house of Zeus, and I will clasp him by his knees.
273. And I expect to make my case successfully to him.
274. Having spoken thus she went away.
275. That one she left then and there, filled with anger throughout his heart because of the well - girdled woman, she whom they were stealing by force with him being unwilling.
276. As for Odysseus, he was on his way to Chrysa, bringing a sacred sacrifice.
277. When they   entered within the very deep harbor first they took in their sails, then they placed them in the black ship.
278. Then they guided the mast to the mast-holder having lowered it with ropes quickly.
279. And out they cast the anchors.
280. They tied down the boat ’s stern - cables; 2274351
281. As for the men themselves they made their way out at the edge of the sea.
282. They disembarked the sacrifice for the far-shooter Apollo;
283. And out of the sea-faring ship Chryseis walked.
284. And then at that point Odysseus, a man of many counsels, leading her up to the altar, put her in her beloved father ’s hands.
285. And he spoke to him: “Chryses, the lord of men sent me forth, Agamemnon, both to lead your child to you and to perform a sacred sacrifice for Phoebus on behalf of the Danaans, so that we may appease the lord, he who now has set in motion grievous troubles to the Argives.
286. Having spoken in this way, he placed her in his hands.
287. And that man, rejoicing, received his beloved daughter.
288. Quickly the sacred sacrifice for the god they made stand in a row about the well - built altar.
289. Then they purified their hands with water and picked up in their hands ground barley.
290. Then among them Chryses, having raised his hands, began to pray loudly: “Listen to me, silver - bowed one, you who encircled Chrysa and sacred Cilla, and are lord of Tenedos by force.
291. Just as certainly once before you listened to me when I had prayed, and just as certainly you conferred respect upon me, at you also greatly harmed the soldiers of the Achaeans.
292. And still even now, for me fulfill in addition the following wish:
293. Right this minute, now, drive way shameful destruction from the Danaans.
294. So he spoke, praying, and Phoebus Apollo listened to him.
295. But then after they prayed and cast forth the ground barley, they first pulled back the heads of the offerings, and then slaughtered and flayed them.
296. They cut away the thighs and wrapped up and down them in fat, having made it double - folded.
297. Then they placed raw meat on top of the thigh pieces themselves.
298. The old man began to burn them on skewers.
299. Then he began to pour flashing wine on.
300. The young men next to him were holding five - pronged forks in their hands.
301. After a while when the thigh pieces were burned thoroughly and they tasted the organs, they began to cut up the rest and also pierced them with spits through both sides; they skillfully roasted them, and pulled off for themselves everything.
302. After a while, when they stopped themselves from work and prepared for themselves the feast, they kept sharing the feast, nor was their heart lacking in any way from the evenly - divided feast.
303. After a while, when they rid themselves of the desire for drink and for food, the young men first for themselves they filled to the brim mixing - bowls with drink, then they distributed this to everyone, having made the initial libations with the drinking - cups.
304. Those men throughout the entire day continued to appease the god through song and dance, the elite young men of the Achaeans singing the beautiful song to Apollo, celebrating with song the far-shooter.
305. And that one, listening, was pleased in his heart.
306. And when the sun sank and dusk arrived, then they lay themselves down to sleep beside the stern- cables of the ship.
307. And when early - born, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, right at that time then they began bringing themselves back to the midst of the broad camp of the Achaeans.
308. For them the far-shooter Apollo set in motion a favorable wind.
309. And as for those men, they stood up for themselves the mast and spread high and wide the white sails.
310. Wind swelled the sail in its center.
311. And on both sides a wave, surging, was splashing against the front of the ship, as it travelled.
312. And that ship, making time through its path, kept running over the wave.
313. And then, after they arrived at the broad camp of the Achaeans, first they pulled the black ship onto land, far up upon the sandy shore, and then they laid out the long supports underneath.
314. Then the men themselves began to scatter throughout both the resting - places and Meanwhile that man remained filled with wrath, sitting alongside his swift - sailing ships - the descendent of Zeus, son of Peleus, swift - footed Achilles:
315. Neither did he ever resume his habit of entering into the assembly that brings glory to men, nor into war.
316. Instead he kept wearing and wearing away his beloved heart, remaining right where he was.
317. He kept longing and longing for both the battle - shout and war.
318. However   from that point, when the twelfth dawn took place then   the gods, existing always, went to Olympus, all of them at the same time.
319. Zeus was leading the way.
320. Thetis was not forgetful of the demands of her own son - Far from it: that woman rose up over a wave of the sea.
321. In the early morning she went up to great heaven and Olympus.
322. She found the far-seeing son of Cronos sitting apart from the others, on the highest summit of many - peaked Olympus.
323. And so then she sat down before Zeus himself, and she laid hold of his knees with her left hand, and with her right hand she gripped beneath his chin, pleading with him, she addressed the lord Zeus, son of Cronos: “Father Zeus, if at any time I among the immortals helped you, either by word or by deed, fulfill this wish for me: treat my son with proper respect, he who was doomed to the most swift death of others.
324. Instead, now the lord of men Agamemnon has shown disrespect to him.
325. For he, having snatched his prize, holds it - - he himself having stolen it.
326. Instead you for your part, I beg you, show proper respect for him, all - wise Olympian Zeus: so long place in the possession the Trojans superior strength, until the Achaeans show proper respect to my son and glorify him with a position of respect.
327. So she spoke, and he did not address her at all, Zeus the cloud -summoner.
328. Rather, in silence he remained motionless for a long time.
329. And as Thetis took hold for herself his knees, in this way she kept holding herself on, having attached herself on him.
330. And again a second time she began to petition him: “Promise most faithfully to me, and nod your head in approval, or refuse, since for you fear does not exist, so that I may know well how greatly I am the most disrespected goddess among all.
331. That woman, he answered, greatly agitated,, Zeus the cloud - summoner: “Without a doubt these deeds are destructive, since you will push me to stir up a fight Hera, when she would torment me with insulting words.
332. And to be sure in the same manner, among the immortal gods, with me always she picks fights.
333. And she even claims that I support the Trojans in battle.
334. But as for you, first, go back now, lest she should become aware of anything, Hera.
335. Then these things will be an an object of concern for me until I am completely finished with it.
336. But come - I will nod my approval to you with my head so that you may have settled confidence.
337. As you know, this from me is truly the greatest sign among the immortals.
338. for mine is not to be taken back, nor something that can deceive, nor can it go unfulfilled - - whatever I may nod my approval to with my head.
339. He spoke, And with his dark brows, he gave the nod of approval, the son of Cronos.
340. And his divine hair flowed down from the lord ’s immortal head.
341. And he shook great Olympus.
342. Then the two, having planned together in this way, separated.
343. Then, she, for her part, lept from glittering Olympus into the deep sea, while Zeus went to his own home.
344. All the gods stood up at the same time from their seats in front of their father; not one of them had the nerve to stay in their place as he was approaching.
345. Instead facing him in greeting, they stood - - each and every one of them.
346. So there indeed he sat down on his throne.
347. But Hera, when she had seen him, did not fail to understand that she had fashioned plans together with him, silver - footed Thetis, the daughter of the old man of the sea.
348. Right then and there with cutting words she began to address Zeus, the son of Cronos: “Who of the gods fashioned plans together with you, devious one, this time?
349. It is always dear to you being far away from me, thinking secret things to pass judgment on.
350. Then he began to answer her, the father of both men and of gods: “Hera, do not expect to know all my decisions: they will be too difficult for you, despite being my wife.
351. This is how it is.
352. Of course, whatever is fitting to hear, then not anyone, neither any of the gods nor of humans will know that decision before you.
353. But, that said, whatever decision I, for my part, might choose to think through separately from the gods, Do not in any way as for, you, for your part - do not in any way pose questions about or inquire after each and every one of these things.
354. Then she began to answer him, the ox-eyed, revered Hera: “You are the worst, son of Cronos, what sort of command was that which you said?
355. Up until now indeed I neither question you constantly, nor do I make inquiries.
356. But you, very much at - ease, plan these things however you should choose.
357. And now I am filled with fear horribly down through my heart, that she may have convinced you, silver - footed Thetis, daughter of the old man of the sea.
358. For in the early morning she seated herself beside you and took hold of your knees.
359. To her, I think that you actually nodded in approval so that you would show respect to Achilles, and you would destroy many of the Achaeans beside the ships.
360. Answering, cloud - summoner Zeus addressed her: “You are out of your mind !
361. You always are calculating.
362. And never do I slip past you.
363. All the same, you will not be able to accomplish anything.
364. Instead from my heart you will be much more distant.
365. And this will be even more to be feared by you.
366. If this is like this, it is going to be pleasing to me.
367. Instead, sit in silence !
368. Obey my command, or else however many gods that are in Olympus now would not protect you from me, coming close, when I would set invincible hands in motion against you.
369. So he spoke.
370. And she became frightened, the ox-eyed, revered Hera.
371. So in silence she sat down, clamping down on her beloved heart.
372. Throughout the house of Zeus the heavenly gods were made upset.
373. Among them Hephaestus, celebrated for his ability to make things, began to speak to the group conveying pleasing things to his beloved mother, white - armed Hera: “Without a doubt these deeds will be destructive, and they will not be tolerable any longer if you two quarrel in this way because of mortals and stir up a brawl among the gods.
374. Nor will there be any enjoyment of this good feast, since the worse win.
375. To my mother I for my part give this advice, even though she can think for herself: to convey pleasing things to my beloved father Zeus, so that my father would not fight again and disturb the feast along with us.
376. For there is indeed the possibility that the Olympian of lightning would choose to shove us out of our seats.
377. That one, as we all know, is the one who can generate the most force by far.
378. Instead, you on your end, addressing that man with soft words.
379. Immediately then the Olympian will be gracious to us.
380. He spoke thus.
381. And, having lept up, he placed a two -handled cup in his dear mother ’s hand.
382. And he spoke to her: “Be strong, my mother.
383. And hold yourself up, although being troubled, lest I may see in my eyes you, beloved as you are, being beaten.
384. And then I will not be able, though stricken with pain, to offer protection in any way.
385. As you know, the Olympian is very hard to set oneself against.
386. For before now, also at another time as I was attempting to defend you, he flung me, having seized my foot, down from the divine threshold.
387. Throughout the entire day I was propelled.
388. Along with the setting sun I ended my downward fall on Lemnos.
389. But still a little spirit was still present within.
390. There the Sintian men straight away took care of me, after having fallen.
391. So he spoke.
392. And white - armed goddess Hera smiled.
393. And, after having smiled, she accepted from her child the cup in her hand.
394. As for him, that one, starting from the left and moving to the right, for all the other gods began to pour out wine, drawing sweet nectar out of the mixing - bowl;
395. Laughter too loud to be drowned out then was stirred up among the blessed gods, as they saw Hephaestus bustling through the house.
396. Then in this manner all day, until the sun had set, they kept sharing the feast.
397. Neither was their heart lacking anything of the equally - divided feast, nor indeed of the outstandingly beautiful lyre, which Apollo was holding, nor of the Muses, who were singing, taking turns, with a beautiful voice.
398. And then, after the shining light of the sun sank down, the rest of them each went to their home in order to lie down, where for each the widely - renowned and crippled in both feet Hephaestus made a house, with his knowing mind.
399. And Olympian Zeus, god of lightning, made his way to his bed.
400. There formerly he used to rest himself when sweet sleep might come to him.
401. There, having ascended, he lay down to sleep.
402. And at his side was golden - throned Hera.
