1. Dawn, out of her bed from beside noble Tithonus, began to rouse herself, so that she might carry in light to the undying gods and to the mortal men.
2. The gods started to take their seats in their places, and among them then was Zeus, who thunders on high, and whose power is the greatest.
3. To them Athena began narrating the many troubles of Odysseus, bringing these things to mind - for he was a concern to her, because he was in the house of the woman: “Father Zeus and the other blessed gods, who exist forever, may not anyone be eagerly mild and kind, the staff - holding king, nor may he know righteous things in his heart, but may he always be harsh, and let him do evil things - because not one has until now brought to mind god - like Odysseus of the people for whom he was lord; he was kind like a father.
4. But yet he lies on the island, suffering powerful sorrows in the great rooms of the nymph Calypso, she who by force holds him back: and still he is not able to return to his own fatherland, for there are no ships equipped with oars nor comrades with him who might escort him home over the wide surface of the sea.
5. Again now they have done everything in their power to kill his beloved child, as he returns home: for he went after what people had heard about his father, to most holy Pylos and to heavenly Lacedaemon.
6. And answering her, Zeus the cloud - summoner spoke: “My child, what a speech of yours escaped from the fence of your teeth - for did you not in truth plan this scheme yourself, that surely Odysseus himself will exact vengeance on those people after his arrival?
7. But you, get Telemachus home in your clever way, for you are able, so that he, quite unhurt, may reach his own fatherland, and the suitors may depart back again in their ship.
8. And then, facing Hermes, his beloved son, he began speaking: “Hermes, of course since you are a messenger in other things, say to the beautiful - haired nymph this authoritative decision: the return of Odysseus, he whose heart has endured much, so that he may return home through the guidance neither of the gods nor of mortal humans; instead may that man, suffering hardships, on a boat with many fastenings reach fertile Scheria on the twentieth day, to the land of the Phaeacians, who were born closely - connected to the gods, and who will show him respect to the highest degree in their heart, as they would a god, and they will send him in a ship to the beloved land belonging to my fathers having given him bronze and gold and clothing in heaps, many things - as many as Odysseus never would have carried out for himself from Troy ever, even if he had come without suffering, having collected his share out of the war-spoils.
9. For this is his fate, both to see those who are dear to him and to return to his high - ceilinged home, and into his own fatherland.
10. So he spoke, and the messenger, the slayer of Argus, did not disobey.
11. At once he bound under his feet his beautiful sandals, the kind that are suited to a god, gold, those which would bear him over both the water and over the boundless land alongside the blasts of wind.
12. He took hold of his wand, with which he enchants the eyes of men, of whomever he chooses, and also wakes again those who are sleeping.
13. Holding this between his hands, the powerful slayer of Argus began to fly, and, having mounted Pieria from the sky, he plunged towards the sea.
14. Then he swept over a wave like a skimmer - bird, which, while down along the terrible swells of the barren sea, hunting fish, wets its dense wings in the salt - sea; like this Hermes rode upon the many waves.
15. But when he arrived at the island that was far away, there, after stepping out of the deep - blue sea, towards the mainland he made his way until he came upon the great cave, in which the beautiful - haired nymph was living: and he found her being within.
16. On one side a great fire was burning in the hearth, while in the distance the smell of both split cedar and juniper spread its fragrance up through the island as they blazed.
17. And she, singing with a beautiful voice inside, walking back and forth before the loom, was weaving with a golden pin-beater.
18. A forest had grown up all around the cave, flourishing: alder and poplar and sweet - smelling cypress.
19. There long - winged birds would nest: owls and falcons and sharp -tongued crows of the sea; to them, the affairs of the sea are their business.
20. And this had stretched itself right there, all around the hollow cave, the youthful garden - vine, and it had already bloomed with grape-bunches.
21. Springs, four in a row, continuously bubbled with white water next to one another, having turned themselves in one way, then another.
22. All around soft meadows of violets and parsley were blooming; and there and then even an immortal, having approached, would gaze in wonder, having seen it, and be delighted in his heart.
23. There he stood, and he began to gaze in wonder, the messenger and slayer of Argus.
24. Nevertheless after he gazed at all these things in his own heart, he then went straightaway into the wide cave.
25. And indeed she did not fail to recognize him, looking him in the face, Calypso, goddess among goddesses: for the gods are not unknown to one another, the immortals, not even if someone lives within a far-away house.
26. But he did not find great-hearted Odysseus inside, as instead that man was crying, sitting on the shore in the very place where he had just as before: through tears and groans and sufferings he was shattering his heart.
27. He would constantly spend his time looking out over the barren sea, pouring forth tears.
28. She began to question Hermes, Calypso, goddess among goddesses, having seated him on a shining, glittering chair: “Why to me, Hermes of the golden wand, have you come - you for whom I have both respect and friendship?
29. Certainly in the past you have not been accustomed to come on account of anything.
30. Express whatever it is you have in mind: my heart orders me to fulfill it - if I am in fact able to fulfill it, and if it is fulfillable.
31. But follow me forth, so that I might place hospitable things beside you.
32. Then, having spoken in this way, the goddess put a table beside him having filled it with ambrosia, and she mixed the dark nectar.
33. He for his part began to drink and eat, the messenger and slayer of Argus; then, after he ate his meal and restored his heart through the food, at that time he spoke to her through words, answering: “You, a goddess, ask me, a god, about my arrival?
34. All right, to you I will truthfully give the message, since you push me to.
35. Zeus was the one who had ordered me, really, to come to this place even though I did not want to.
36. Who, willingly, would wish to run across so much briney water - inexpressibly vast?
37. Nor is there any city of mortal men nearby, they who for the gods Make offerings and desired sacrifices.
38. But after all, it is not at all possible that the design of aegis-holding Zeus another god should either slip past or disappoint.
39. He says that a man is here with you, the most miserable out of all the others of those men who kept fighting all about the city of Priam for nine years, but in the tenth, having plundered the city, went home.
40. But as it happened they got themselves in trouble with Athena on their homeward journey - against them she stirred up both an evil wind and big waves.
41. There on the one hand all the other men died, his good comrades, but that one the driving wind and the waves both brought near to this place.
42. He was the one who had commanded that you send that one away now as quickly as possible - for it is not his fate to die here, far away from his friends.
43. Instead still his fate is both to see his friends and to return to his high - roofed home and to his own fatherland.
44. So he spoke, and Calypso shuddered, goddess among goddesses, and, having spoken winged words, she began to address him: “Cruel are you all, gods, jealous above all others, and you who are spiteful to goddesses that lie in bed beside mortal men as a public affair, if anyone ever makes for herself a dear husband.
45. It was so indeed when rosy-fingered Dawn took Orion for herself - during that time, the gods, living pleasantly, were spiteful towards her- until in Ortygia, pure, golden - throned Artemis with her gentle arrows, approaching, killed him.
46. And it was also so with Iasion when beautiful - haired Demeter, having given way to her heart, joined in love and in a bed of land ploughed three times; and he was not kept in ignorance of this for a long time, Zeus - he killed him, striking with a bright lightning - bolt.
47. And again it is so even now - to me you gods all are spiteful that a mortal man is present.
48. As for him, I was the one who rescued him after he had arrived wrapped around the ship ’s keel, alone, since with a bright lightning - bolt his swift ship Zeus squeezed and broke into pieces in the wine - colored mid-sea.
49. There on the one hand all the other good comrades died, but on the other that one the driving wind and the waves both brought near to this place.
50. As for him, I was the one who both was showing affection to, and kept caring for, him, and over and over I told him that I would make him immortal and unaging for all days.
51. But after all, as you say it is not at all possible that the design of aegis-holding Zeus another god should either slip past or disappoint.
52. Fine - let him go, if that god pushes and even orders him, onto the barren sea.
53. But I, for my part you can be sure, will not send him anywhere, for there are no ships equipped with oars near to me, and no comrades who might get him home over the wide back of the sea.
54. All that being said, in good faith I will share advice with him, and I will not hide anything, so that he, quite unhurt, may arrive at his own fatherland.
55. To her in return the messenger and slayer of Argus spoke: “As you say - now send him on his way, and watch yourself against the wrath of Zeus, lest he, having developed a grudge against you in any way, may be harsh afterwards.
56. Having spoken in this way, the mighty slayer of Argus then left.
57. She, the revered nymph, towards great-hearted Odysseus made her way, after she listened to the message of Zeus.
58. She found him sitting on the shore: his two eyes were not ever dry from his tears, and sweet life kept dripping away from him, mourning his return home, since the nymph was not pleasing anymore.
59. But in fact, on one hand, night after night he would always lie by necessity in the hollow caves - he, unwilling, beside her, willing; on the other hand during the days, sitting on the rocks and beaches, through tears, and groans, and sufferings, shattering his heart.
60. He would constantly spend his time looking out over the barren sea, pouring out tears.
61. Coming to a stop nearby, she began to talk to him, goddess among goddesses: “Ill - fated one, do not grieve here with me still, and let your life not waste away: for now, entirely in good faith, I will send you on your way.
62. But come - once you have cut long beams with the bronze ax, join together a wide boat, and then fix for yourself deck - beams on it, so that it may carry you high up over the misty sea.
63. On the other hand, as for me, prepared food and water and red wine I will place within in suitable amounts, which might keep away hunger for you; and I will dress you in clothing, and at your back I will send a helpful wind, so that you quite unhurt might arrive at your own fatherland, if indeed the gods may wish it - those who hold the wide heavens, they are more powerful than me both in design and in execution.
64. So she spoke, and he shuddered, much - suffering godly Odysseus, and, having spoken winged words, he addressed her: “For your part, you certainly are planning something else right now and not sending me on my way in any way, you who command me to cross over the great abyss of the sea on a boat, both terrifying and troubling: over this the well - balanced quick ships do not cross over, taking delight in the helpful wind of Zeus.
65. Nor would I, for my part, set foot on a boat without your support, unless you would be prevailed upon, goddess, to swear for me a great oath, that you will not plan any other evil misery for my own self.
66. So he spoke, and she broke out into a smile, Calypso, goddess among goddesses.
67. She both stroked him with her hand, and began speaking with authority; she called out to him familiarly: “You really are a wicked man, and you know things that are not useless, since you decided to perform a speech like this.
68. Now let the earth know this, and the wide heavens from above, and the rushing - down water of the Styx, which is both the greatest and the most terrifying oath that exists for the blessed gods - that I will not plan any other evil misery for you yourself.
69. But certainly I have these things in mind, and I will consider them, just as that which I might plan for my own self when so great a need may come to me.
70. In fact my mind, you may be sure, is honest, and the heart in my own chest is not iron- instead it is caring.
71. Having spoken in this way, then she, goddess among goddesses, guided him swiftly; he then began to walk along the footsteps of the goddess.
72. They arrived at the hollow cave - the goddess and then also the man - and there he sat down upon the chair from which he had stood up, Hermes, and the nymph began to place beside him all kinds of food, to eat and also to drink - the sort that mortal men eat.
73. She herself began to sit opposite god - like Odysseus, and beside her, servant - women placed ambrosia and nectar.
74. They began to lay their hands on the prepared food set before them.
75. Then, after they enjoyed the food and drink, between them Calypso first began the serious discussion, goddess among goddesses: “Zeus -born son of Laertes, much -inventive Odysseus, in this way, really, homeward to the beloved land that belonged to your fathers - right here and now do you wish to go?
76. But as for you - good luck to you all the same.
77. If only you might know in your gut however many troubles it is the fate assigned to you to fill up, until you arrive in the land that belonged to your fathers; then instead staying right here, you would keep this very house along with me, and you would be immortal, even though longing to see your wife, she whom you always desire each and every day.
78. I can certainly state with confidence that I myself am not inferior to that woman, neither in form nor in stature, since it is not at all fitting that mortal women should compete with immortal women over form and beauty.
79. Answering her, Odysseus of many counsels spoke: “Revered goddess, do not be angry with me in this way: even I myself know all these things entirely - because Penelope, who perceives everything around her, compared to you is inferior to look upon with respect to form and height: for she, on the one hand, is mortal, while on the other hand you are undying and unaging.
80. But even so, I wish and even long each and every day both to go back home and to see for myself my day of return.
81. If any of the gods again should strike on the wine - colored sea, I will endure, having a heart that endures sufferings in my chest - for already I have suffered so very many things, and many things I have struggled through in the waves and in warfare: let also this take its place among those.
82. So he spoke, and the sun sank and dusk came over; going in the farthest corner of the hollow cave, the two began to enjoy themselves in love, remaining beside each other.
83. When early rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, at once he on the one hand put on both a cloak and a tunic, Odysseus, while she herself put on a great shining mantle, the nymph, delicate in weave and graceful, and around her waist she wrapped a belt, beautiful and golden, and a veil on top of her head.
84. Then she began to plan her contribution to the journey for great-hearted Odysseus - she gave to him a great ax, closely fitted in the palms of his hands, made of bronze, sharpened on both sides.
85. Looking more closely, on the ax itself was a handle, very beautiful and made of olive - wood, well - fastened.
86. She gave to him afterwards a carpenter ’s ax of polished metal; she began to lead the way over the edge of the island, where the trees had grown tall, alder and black poplar, and also fir, grown as high as the heavens - dry for a long time, well - seasoned - these would float lightly for him.
87. As for her, after she revealed the place where the trees had grown tall, she on the one hand walked towards her house, Calypso, goddess among goddesses, while he began to cut planks for himself - his work was accomplished quickly.
88. Twenty he cut down in total, and then he axed them with bronze, and he smoothed them skillfully, and also straightened them upon a level line.
89. During that time she brought chisels, Calypso, divine of goddesses: he chiseled holes into them all and joined them to each other, and with wooden pegs and fastenings he hammered together that boat.
90. As great as any man might round off the base of a ship - a wide cargo vessel - - well - versed in the practices of a carpenter, so great a size Odysseus built for himself the wide boat upon this.
91. Having raised the deck - platform, fitting them to the close - set ribs, he continued building - and then he began finishing by means of the long gunwale planks.
92. Then he began building a mast and yard - arm, fastened onto it.
93. Then also he built for himself a rudder, so that he could steer.
94. He fortified it thoroughly with willow wicker - work, so that it would be a defense from the waves; he heaped up for himself much brush.
95. During that time, she brought textiles - Calypso, divine of goddesses - to make for himself a sail; those things too he crafted for himself skillfully.
96. The sails’ upper braces and the cables and the sails’ feet he tied in on the ship itself, and with levers he then hauled her into the divine sea.
97. It was the fourth day when all things had been completed by him; then on the fifth she had him begin his journey from the island, divine Calypso, having clothed him in sweet - smelling robes and having bathed him.
98. Within the goddess placed for him a leather container - of dark wine, this one - and another large one of water, and also food in a leather sack: inside she was packing many strength -giving cooked meats for him.
99. She sent forward a favorable wind, both gentle and warm.
100. Filled with happiness, god -like Odysseus opened wide his sails to the wind.
101. He then began to steer himself with the rudder with practiced skill, having taken his seat.
102. Nor did sleep ever fall upon his eyelids, looking over the Pleiads, and after a long time the sinking Bootes, and the Great Bear - which also they call by another name, the wagon, and she who both circles around herself in that spot and also watches Orion.
103. She alone has no share of the cleansing waters of Oceanus; Regarding this constellation, in fact, Calypso, goddess among goddesses, had ordered that he pass over the sea while keeping it on the left side of his hand.
104. At first, for seven and ten days he kept sailing, passing over the sea, but then on the eighteenth day shadowy mountains were visible of Phaeacian land, where it was nearest to him: it was visible just like a skin on the misty sea.
105. But that man the ruling Earth-shaker, coming back from the Ethiopians, saw from far away, out of the mountains of the Solymi - for he was seen by him, as he sailed over the sea.
106. And he became even more greatly angered in his heart, shaking his head - he deliberated with his own spirit: “Are you kidding me?
107. Surely the gods greatly changed their plans in a different direction regarding Odysseus, while I was among the Ethiopians.
108. And now he is near the land of the Phaeacians; there his lot is to escape the great fated share of suffering which comes upon him.
109. All the same I insist that I will in fact still drive him towards his fill of hardship.
110. Having spoken thus, he began to drive together the clouds, and he stirred up the sea after seizing his trident with his hands: he began to rouse all the gusts of every kind of wind, and with the clouds he covered over the land and the sea at once - and night had come down from heaven.
111. At once both the East Wind and South Wind came crashing down, and the stormy West Wind, and also the North Wind, born from ether, rolling a great wave.
112. Then the knees of Odysseus and his dear heart gave out, and, agitated, he spoke to his great-hearted spirit: “Oh me, for my part I am miserable - what now might finally happen to me?
113. I dread that all the things the goddess said are correct: she stated that on the sea, before I return to the land that belonged to my fathers, I will have my fill of suffering - and now all these things are being fulfilled.
114. With such clouds he encircles the wide heavens, Zeus, and he stirred the sea; and they rage on, the gusts of winds of all kinds.
115. Now steep death is certain for me.
116. Three times blessed are the Danaans - even four times - who were lost then in wide Troy, bringing happiness to the sons of Atreus.
117. So I, for my part, ought to have died and met my fate on that day when at me the greatest number cast bronze - covered spears, the Trojans, around the son of Peleus after he died.
118. In that case I would have had my share of funeral gifts, and the Achaeans would have maintained my own fame; but it had been fated for me to be taken now by miserable death.
119. Then, thus speaking, a great wave struck him down from above, rushing in a way that struck him with terror, and it whirled around all about the boat.
120. As for him, far away from the boat he fell, and the rudder he dropped from his hands; it shattered his mast in the middle, the terrifying storm that had come from the winds, mixing with one another, and far away the sail and yard - arm fell in the sea.
121. It held him underwater for a long time, and he was not able at first to completely get up from under the surge of the great wave: for the clothes kept weighing him down, those which divine Calypso provided him.
122. After a long time he rose to the surface, and he spat saltwater out of his mouth - the bitter saltwater, which gurgled from his head in great amounts.
123. Even so, he was not forgetful of the boat, however worn - out he was, and instead he, lunging after it in the waves, took hold of it for himself; he sat down in its middle, avoiding the fulfillment of his own death.
124. A great wave repeatedly carried along this boat down the current, this way and that way.
125. And as when in late summer the North Wind may carry along thistles over a plain, and they cling close beside one another, so did the winds keep carrying the boat over the sea, this way and that way: now, on one hand, the South Wind would toss it over to the North Wind to be carried - then, on the other hand, again the East Wind would yield to the West Wind to propel it.
126. But she saw him - the daughter of Cadmus, beautiful - ankled Ino, Leukothea (the white goddess), she who was previously mortal and used human speech, but now in the seas of brine she had received the position of rank from the gods.
127. That woman took pity on wandering Odysseus, possessing sufferings.
128. Like a seagull in flight she lifted herself out of the sea, and she sat down on the boat with many fastenings, and she spoke a command: “Ill - fated one, why to this degree has Poseidon the Earthshaker gotten himself into a fury violently, that for you he plants the seeds of many evil things?
129. Indeed he will not destroy you, however much he is worked up.
130. Instead, act much in this way - you seem to me not to be stupid: taking off those clothes, leave the boat to be carried by the winds - instead, swimming with your hands, grasp your homecoming - the land of the Phaeacians, where your fate is to escape.
131. Here - drape this headscarf beneath your chest, this headscarf, the kind that immortals wear: for you there is no fear of suffering anything or dying.
132. However, when you take hold of the mainland with your hands, having loosened it from yourself in order to cast it back again into the wine - colored sea, very far from the mainland - and as for you, turn yourself away - far away.
133. Having spoken in this way, the goddess then gave the headscarf and she herself sank back into the swelling sea like a seagull - and a dark wave concealed her.
134. Meanwhile, for his part, the much -suffering, godlike Odysseus, he pondered.
135. Agitated, he then spoke to his own great-hearted spirit: “Oh me, I fear that one of the immortals is weaving a trap for me again, that she orders me to get away from the boat.
136. Instead I will most definitely not follow her directions immediately, since far out I, for my part, see with my own eyes land, where she said that there is a chance of escape for me.
137. Instead I will most definitely do it this way - this seems to be the best for me.
138. So long as the beams should remain joined together in their joints, so long I will remain right here, and I will endure, suffering hardships.
139. But then when a wave should smash my boat apart, I will swim, since it really is not possible to plan out ahead of time anything better.
140. While he was turning these things over through his heart and also through his spirit, Poseidon the Earth-shaker sent surging in his direction a great wave, both terrifying and harsh, arching over the boat.
141. It drove Odysseus himself.
142. Like a stormy wind might rattle a pile of dried husks - these it scatters, some in one direction, and some in another - just so it scattered the long beams of the boat.
143. As for him, Odysseus, he straddled one beam as if driving a race - horse, and he started to take off the clothes, those which divine Calypso handed to him.
144. Immediately he draped the headscarf below his chest, and he himself fell face - first down in the sea, having spread out his two hands, doing everything in his power to swim.
145. The ruling Earth-shaker saw, shaking his head - he deliberated with his own spirit: “Like this now, having suffered many evils, wander down through the sea, until, into that place, you may have dealings with people tended to by Zeus.
146. But even so I do not suppose that you will make light of this hardship.
147. Then, having spoken in this way, he whipped his beautiful - maned horses, and he arrived in Aegae, where his famous homes are.
148. But for her part, Athena, the daughter of Zeus, had in her mind other things.
149. In fact she tied down the paths of the other winds, and she commanded all of them together to stop what they were doing, and to put themselves at rest: she stirred up upon him the quick North Wind, and before him she beat the waves down, so that he might have dealings with the oar - loving Phaeacians - Zeus-born Odysseus, having escaped death and also fate.
150. There through two nights and two days he was constantly buffeted by the strong swell, and many times his heart kept anticipating his destruction.
151. But when beautiful - haired Dawn brought the third day to pass, at that point afterwards the wind stopped, and a calm, windless, began: and so he caught sight of land nearby, especially sharp -eyed, having looked out, and having been lifted up from under a great wave.
152. And as when the hoped - for life of their father might appear to children, he who lies in sickness, suffering harsh pains, wasting away for a long time - a hateful spirit had been having its way with him.
153. But then indeed the gods free him, hoped for, from the evil - even so hoped - for to Odysseus both the land and the forest appeared.
154. And he kept swimming, scrambling to step upon the mainland with his feet.
155. Yet when he was as far away as a man can make himself heard by shouting, then he heard the crash of the sea against the rocks, for the great wave kept roaring against the coast of the mainland, spewing terribly, and all things had been cloaked by the foam of the sea.
156. For there were no secure harbors of ships, nor any places of shelter; instead there were jutting coasts, as well as rocks and cliffs.
157. And then the knees and beloved heart of Odysseus gave way, and he, agitated, spoke to his own great-hearted spirit: “Oh me, as soon as he gave me the ability to see land that I had not dared to hope for, Zeus, and I, by cutting through, crossed this gulf - no escape out of the gray sea is in any way visible.
158. For outside there are sharp cliffs, and on both sides a wave, rushing, wails, and a smooth rock rose up.
159. The sea is even deep near the shore; it is not at all possible to stand on both feet and to run away from this hardship - I fear that in some way it would throw me, making my way out, against the hard rock, the great wave, having seized me - and my attempt will be in vain.
160. But if I will swim along still farther, somewhere I would find both shelving beaches and inlets from the sea - but I fear that a squall, having snatched me up once again, will carry me, groaning deeply, over the fish - filled sea.
161. Or even that a god might send against me some great beast of the sea from out of the deep: renowned Amphitrite nourishes many of this sort.
162. For I know how much the renowned Earth-shaker has been angered at me.
163. As he kept turning over these things through his heart and through his spirit, meanwhile a great wave began to carry him toward the rocky coast.
164. There he would have had his skin stripped away and his bones smashed together, if the goddess, silvery - eyed Athena, had not placed this into his thoughts: and with a rush he took hold of the rock with both his hands.
165. He kept holding on to that rock, groaning, until the great wave passed by.
166. And at first he escaped this in this way, but then, surging back again, it struck him with a rush, and threw him far into the sea.
167. As when an octopus is being pulled from its den, pebbles stick to its closely - packed suckers, so from the bold hands of that one onto the rocks his skin was ripped off: and the great wave covered him.
168. There for sure miserable Odysseus would have been lost, outside the boundary of his fate, if she had not given him presence of mind, silvery - eyed Athena.
169. Having emerged from the wave, which spews forth towards the mainland, he began swimming out along the shore, looking out into the land in the hopes that somewhere he might find both shelving beaches and inlets from the sea.
170. But when, down along the mouth of a beautifully - flowing river he arrived, swimming, here indeed the land seemed best to him, as it was smooth of rocks, and even a shelter from the wind besides.
171. He recognized the river, flowing out, and prayed according to his own spirit: “Listen to me, lord, whoever you are: I come to you, one addressed by many suppliants, having fled the abuse of Poseidon out of the sea.
172. Any man is an object of respect - even to the undying gods - whoever of all the men arrives, wandering, just as I, for my part, now arrive at both your current and your knees, having worked my way through so many things.
173. Just take pity, lord: I formally assert that I am your suppliant.
174. He said this, and immediately that god put a stop to his current and held back the waves, and he made a calm before him, and he saved him into the mouth of the river.
175. That man then bent both his knees and his strong hands - for his dear heart had been overcome by the sea.
176. All his flesh was swollen, while much seawater kept gushing up through both his mouth and nose.
177. He, breathless and speechless, was lying down with feeble strength, and brutal exhaustion began to reach him.
178. But when he caught his breath, and his spirit was collected into his heart, then he untied the headscarf of the goddess from him and let it go into the river that flows into the sea; the great wave began to carry it back again down along the current, and quickly Ino then received it in her dear hands.
179. He, withdrawing out of the river, lay down under the reeds, and he kissed the fertile soil.
180. Agitated, he then spoke to his great-hearted spirit: “Oh me, what may I suffer?
181. Now what may befall me next?
182. If, on the one hand, I keep watch in this riverbed throughout the hard night, I fear that both the evil frost and fresh dew together might be the end of me, having given my final breath, as a result of my weakened condition - a freezing breeze from the river blows before dawn.
183. On the other hand, if, having gone up into the hillside and shady forest, I should fall asleep in the dense bushes - assuming that they might allow me, the cold and exhaustion and that sweet sleep might come upon me - I fear that I may become prey and a find for wild predators.
184. So this seemed to be more profitable to him, as he pondered: he went to go into the forest, which he found near the water in a visible place.
185. He then went under two bushes, which had grown out of the same spot - while this one was of thorn wood, the other was of olive wood.
186. Certainly through these neither the damp force of the gusty winds would blow, nor would the shining sun ever strike with its beams, nor would the rain ever pass through: so dense they had grown, tangled up with each other.
187. Under these Odysseus lowered himself.
188. Immediately he piled up a bed for himself with his dear hands - a wide one, for the heap of leaves was very much sufficient, as great as would be needed to protect either two or three men in the winter season, even if it might be especially severe.
189. Having seen this he rejoiced, the much -suffering godlike Odysseus, and then in the middle he laid himself; he piled over himself a heap of leaves.
190. Like when someone buries a piece of burning wood in dark ashes at the borderland of the field, near to which there are no other neighbors, preserving the seed of fire so that he would not need to get light from some other place, so did Odysseus cover himself in leaves.
191. Athena then began to pour sleep upon his eyes, so that it, swiftly, might cause him to leave off from laborious trouble, having covered over his dear eyelids.
